 - Welcome to C Programming for Everybody.
 My name's Charles Severance,
 and I'm your instructor for this course.
 This course and website is dedicated to learning
 the classic version of C programming language
 from the 1978 book written by Brian W. Kernigan
 and Dennis M. Ritchie.
 This book places the reader in the middle
 of the 1970s transition from a hardware-centered
 computer science to a focus on writing portable
 and efficient software.
 C was used to develop operating systems
 like Unix, Minix, and Linux.
 Programming languages like Perl, Python, Java,
 and JavaScript and Ruby are all written in C.
 Software like early TCP/IP networking stack implementations
 that made the internet possible were written in C.
 And the first web browsers and web servers
 were written in C.
 Writing software in C enabled major advances
 in computer architecture and performance.
 Operating systems, compilers, and utilities
 could be recompiled to work on a new hardware platform
 once we had a C compiler for the new hardware.
 So much software has been written in C
 over the past 40 years that there's a very good chance
 that much of the software that you use every day
 was either written in C or written in a programming language
 that was written in C.
 So we study C less as a programming language
 to use on a daily basis and more as the foundation
 of modern software and computing.
 In many ways, C is the technology equivalent
 of the Rosetta Stone in that it provides a connection
 between the programming languages of the past
 and the programming languages of the present.
 The name CC4E in www.cc4e.com
 refers to the original Unix command CC,
 which was the command that you used
 to compile your C program.
 CC stood for C compiler and it is featured on the first page
 of the first chapter of the KNRC book.
 Programmers like me from the 1970s and 1980s
 type CC on Unix systems like the AT&T 3B2
 to compile and run their first Hello World program in C.
 This material is being presented under fair use
 as we are making use of material from a copyrighted work
 that is out of print and not broadly available
 in any format.
 The book is also not available in any accessible format.
 We are making use of this material
 in a teaching and research context
 with a focus on studying its contribution
 to computing history.
 The material is available for free and online
 to anyone who wants to learn about the history
 of the C language, computing, and computer architecture.
 Welcome to the course.
