 So the next class that we're going to build in C is an emulation of what you would do if
 you were building the Python list class in C. So let's just start by taking a look at sort of a
 Python and C version of this thing. In Python, we create a new list, then we append a whole string,
 then we print it, then we have another string, then we print it, we have another string,
 we print that, we ask how long is the list, we do an index, which is a positional lookup saying
 where is the string Brian, then we say if Bob's in the list, where's it, or we say we can't find Bob.
 So we have to do an if-then-else and use in because otherwise we'd have to use a try-catch
 because if you do an index with a string that's not there in Python, it's going to blow up. So we
 can either do an if-then-else or we can do a try-catch. It's sort of six in one, half a dozen in
 the other. But in C, we're going to effectively call pylist new to create a new list. We're going
 to call pylist append and again remember all the time we're calling these things that are like
 methods, we're always putting the instance as the first parameter. In this case, LST is the instance.
 So we're going to append hello world, we're going to print it, we're going to append append catch
 phrase, we're going to print it, we're going to append Brian, we're going to print it, then we're
 going to look at the list, length of the list, then we're going to look up Brian, and we're going to
 look up Bob. And in this case, I made it so that the index just gives us back negative one to say
 I didn't find Bob so that I didn't have to try catch because it's like a little bit more C-like.
 And then we do a pylist underscore del to clear up the memory. We are about to switch from being the
 consumer of the list object to the builder of the list object. And our job as the builder of list
 object is to dynamically allocate all the data that we need to make this thing work. And so we
 don't get to see the details of that. All we know is there's these functions that we can call and
 this structure that we can use. And if we call the functions right, somebody else is going to deal
 with all of the dynamic memory that makes this work. And you've done linked lists in previous
 assignments. So linked lists should not be completely foreign to you. But now we're taking
 an object oriented approach to implementing a linked list and hiding the implementation detail
 within the object, which is an important part of the object oriented programming. So here's like
 some basic stuff. And some of this should start looking pretty familiar. We got an L node, which
 is short for list node. We got a pointer to a character string. And then we have a pointer to
 the next one. So we call that one next by convention. Next is not a keyword. Next is just a
 really common convention when we're making linked lists. And then we, and that's just the node. So
 linked list is a list of nodes, but then there's kind of the list itself, and that's what the
 structure PyList is. And it's got a pointer to the head and a pointer to the tail and just a counter.
 And so if we create the new list, PyList new, we are going to allocate the PyList object,
 which is a pointer which is 8, 2 pointer 16, and 4 should be 20 bytes. And then we're going to,
 that's what star P is going to be. Then we're going to set the head to null and the tail to
 null to indicate that we have an empty list. We're just, we're not creating a list with things in it
 and set the count to zero and we're done. So it's pretty straightforward. In some ways it is,
 this list is easier in some ways than the Python string was. Now the destructor is a little trickier
 because we actually have to go through the list and we have to free up all of the text areas,
 not just the struct L nodes, but we've also got the char star text that we've got to get rid of.
 So what we'll see here is we're going to, in the PyList del, we're going to carefully start at the
 head and then loop through and remember that free cur has got to be the last thing we do with cur.
 Once we say free cur for the, that's the L nodes, we got to do the free cur. We're not supposed to
 touch cur ever again. So you'll see I say free cur text, which is the string that's pointed to
 in the current node. Then I look up next and I'm looking up next before I call free cur because
 I'm not supposed to use cur afterwards. So I say next equals cur next. Give me the next pointer
 before I wipe out cur. I wipe out cur and then I say cur equals next. And so I just, I created
 that next variable inside that function just to kind of get past the free cur. So I didn't have
 to say cur equals cur next after I called free cur. And then loop goes through and it slowly
 but surely cleans up all of the L nodes. It might be zero, there might be no L nodes and head will
 be null at that point and while won't even run. But you got to free the text and you got to know
 where the next pointer is. Then you free the current one and then you advance to the next pointer and
 jump up to the while loop and then do the rest. And then and only then afterwards do you free the
 self, which is the actual PyList object. These structures tend to point to structures that tend
 to point to structures and you got to when you're deling them, when you're freeing them, you got to
 free them from the outside. Think of it as a tree. You've got the leaves and the branches and then
 the trunk and then the roots. You got to free them from the leaves inwards. And so just be
 real careful about this. That's part of the reason that I give you so much sample code where I do the
 del for you because I just don't want it to mess up. If we take a look at the step of freeing the
 dynamic memory, you're going to see that it's going to if we have a head and we have a tail here.
 The first thing it's going to do is it's going to to the L node that is the head. And then it's
 going to the first thing that's actually going to be freed is the text. And then it's going to free
 the L node. Then it's going to advance to the next L node, which has is. It's going to free the is.
 Then it's going to free the fourth thing, which is the second L node. And then it's going to advance
 to the third L node. And then it's going to free the fun, which is the fifth thing freed. And then
 it's going to free the last L node and it'll notice that next is is is null. And so we're done when
 there's a three node list. And then the last thing we do is we free the the list itself. So that the
 order in which we free these things is really, really important. And you think of it as the leaves
 outwards, right? The C is fun. Those are three strings that have been allocated. Those have to
 be freed first before we free the L node that happens to point to them. So every little bit
 of order matters. The one thing I want you to do in this one is I want you to make the list output
 instead of it being dumped. You'll notice I called this one print not dump. And I want it to look
 exactly like Python's list output, which means it's got an open square brace. It's got the strings
 and double quotes, single quotes, comma space in between them, etc. And don't try to use string
 concatenation to do this because you're in C. You're not in Python. You don't even know how
 long these strings are going to be. What you need to do is you need to cleverly write a loop that
 uses printf. So think of this as you can only use printf. Don't use a string because you don't have
 strings. Just use printf. And remember that printf doesn't add a new line unless you actually put the
 new line in. So it's pretty easy to do printf open bracket, then printf single quote, printf the
 string, printf single quote, printf comma, etc, etc. So you've got to... It's about 10 lines of code.
 And, you know, enjoy yourself. I think you'll do a pretty good job of this. And you'll be impressed
 when you're all done. And then you think, "Oh, I'm walking down the path of Guido van Rossum."
 Because Guido van Rossum had to write exactly these lines of code. Now, he actually was probably
 using a string class, which I just told you not to use, because he didn't want to... He didn't want
 to call printf directly. So he wanted to make it so you can convert to a string. But whatever.
 You're walking the path that Guido van Rossum walked while he was building the list object.
 That's what I want you to do. Here's some more methods. Some are easier. Some are hard.
 len is really easy. index is not too bad. It's a for loop. Once you loop through, you look for a
 value, and then you just return negative one if you don't find it. You just return the position.
 You got to kind of add to go zero, one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and return the seven if you
 find it. append is a bit tricky, but hey, that was chapter six. You should know how to do that.
 You've actually, by this point in chapter six, you would have written one of these things. So
 go consult your own code at that point. And so here is the ultimate test case of our list class.
 You were just going to mimic that Python code. We're going to append a hello world string,
 append a catchphrase string, append a Brian string, print them all the time. We're going
 to print the length, and we're going to do an index lookup for Brian and Bob, and then we're
 going to delete it. We always delete it because we're not in Python. So we're carefully deleting
 it. And other than the negative one for Bob being 404 in the Python, because that was kind of a joke,
 it is identical, right? We're really starting to build what looks like a Python list.
 So up next, it's pretty much you guessed it. We did a string, we did a list.
 Yep, it's a dictionary. We're going to actually build a dictionary in our next bit.
