
LBS 290F - Important Questions for the first mid-term

Introduction to Computing

  What is the difference between a personal computer and a multi-user
  computer?

  What type of computer is briggs1?

  What is an example of a command which only would make sense to have
  on a multi-user computer?

Introduction to UNIX

  What is a file? 

  What is the command to look at the contents of a file under UNIX?
  What is the command to create a file under UNIX?
  What is the command to delete a file under UNIX?
  What is the command to copy a file under UNIX?

  What is the command to find out which other users are on the system?

  How do you re-direct the output of a command to a file?

Introduction to C

  What is the purpose of a programming language?
  
  How are programming languages created?

  What are data structures used for in a programming language?

  What is a variable?  What does "type" mean in reference to a variable?

  What is the purpose of the executable statements in a programming
  language?

  What are the four types of executable statements?

  What is the difference between sequential, input-output, conditional,
  and repetitive statements?

  Be able to identify which statements of a C program are data structures 
  and which are executable statements.

C Syntax and Operator Precedence

  What are legal variable names?

  When is ; to be used in a program?

  Is end-of-line significant in C?  Give a case where end of line
  is significant.
  
  What is a keyword and what are you prohibited from using keywords for?

  What is the general syntax for integer, floating point, and string
  constants?

  What is operator precedence between the + -  / * operators?

  Be able to compute the value of an expression without parenthesis.

  How do parenthesis affect operator precedence?

C Data Types

  Understand the following types: char, int, short, long, unsigned,
  float, double.

  What is the legal range of values for int and unsigned int?

  What is the legal range of values for float and double?

  How many digits of precision are there in float and double?

  How is type conversion performed among int, float, and double?

C I/O Statements

  What needs to be at the beginning of every program which does 
  input-output?

  How do getchar and putchar work?

  How does printf work for %f and %i formats?

  How does scanf work for %f and %i formats?

  What value does scanf return when there is no data?

  What value does scanf return on end of file?

