 Welcome to chapter two, Types, Operators, and Expressions.
 So again, I'm not going to tell you everything.
 The book, I want you to read the book.
 The book does a great job.
 I'm just gonna call your attention
 to some things that might seem a little bit weird
 if you're coming from a language like Python
 or JavaScript or even PHP where things are objects
 and you don't even notice it.
 You've been using objects your whole career
 and you didn't even realize it.
 So we're gonna talk about data types and storage allocation.
 One of the things that you just got,
 part of what I love about teaching this historical view on C
 is that we have to talk about storage allocation.
 Float and double worked out pretty well,
 partly because in the early days of C,
 they did them all in software, so they just made them easy
 and they made them work well.
 They weren't expected to be fast.
 The things that they wanted to be super fast
 were like the integer and byte data, character data.
 Type conversion, and then there's a story
 that connects integer division in Python 2
 and all that pain of Python 3 and how division changed
 and why it was the way it was and how that worked.
 And again, it has to do with performance
 and simple decisions that got made, sadly.
 Bitwise logical operations, we'll talk about them.
 You're probably not going to use them,
 but it's really important in a historical context
 to understand why they were so thorough.
 And it really had to do with the fact that
 because of word oriented computers switching to character
 oriented computers, all of us programmers
 were thinking in words and if we didn't see shifting
 and masking and bitwise stuff, we'd be like,
 I can't program in this thing 'cause a lot of our work
 in those word oriented computers was masking and shifting.
 And so it's like we had to have it.
 We didn't use it as much as we could have thought.
 So let's start with division.
 (sighs)
 In the good old days, we were not worried too much
 about doing division and if you were doing division
 and you cared about the division,
 you were probably doing it in floating point
 because you were doing scientific computing
 and you did that on supercomputers.
 You didn't do that on general purpose computers.
 Unixer's really designed for general purpose computers
 and in general purpose computers, you thought to yourself,
 why is division that important?
 And I'm sure they made some decision somewhere.
 I do not know why.
 It probably had to do with one of the computers
 they were working with had truncating division in hardware
 and non-truncating division in software.
 I don't know, or rounding division or whatever.
 A lot of those computers didn't even have
 fast floating point, so some of the computers
 they were working on did all the floating point in software
 and maybe they even did integer division in software
 with loops and stuff, but we don't know.
 I don't exactly know, but they made this decision
 to do integer division truncating.
 And this was one of the biggest things
 of going from Python 2 to Python 3
 that was the most painful.
 So Python 2 was over 25 years old
 and it wasn't that long after C that Python 2 was written.
 Python 2 was written in C.
 And Python 2 to Python 3 transition was a big deal.
 It took a long time, it took 12 years to get there.
 But Python 2 was like the greatest thing ever
 except for a few things.
 Because Python 2 was so related to C,
 the strings in Python 2 natively were ASCII, not Unicode,
 which meant it couldn't even do like Spanish characters,
 let alone Asian characters.
 Print was part of the language
 and the programmers got a lot of help.
 Like they got an automated code converter
 and syntax checkers and they did all kinds of things
 where they would take certain libraries
 like the print function and they would put it in Python 3
 and then we backported to Python 2.
 So you could like switch from using the print statement
 to the print function.
 And there were lots of things that made this transition
 as easy as possible.
 The one thing that they really never could crack
 and we just had to bite the bullet and get used to it
 was Python 2 returns integer and the division is truncated.
 So if you do three divided by four is zero in Python 2.
 And in Python 3, integer three divided by integer four
 becomes a floating point 0.75
 because that's what calculators do.
 And the Python 2 division truncated
 because it didn't seem like it mattered much back in the 80s
 and C integer division truncated.
 (coughs)
 So three quarters in C was zero
 and three quarters, integer three quarters was zero in C
 and so it was in Python.
 And 20 plus years later,
 that was the one thing we couldn't auto convert
 and Python 3 does it the way Python does.
 So it's less of a problem in C
 because C is actually a strongly typed language
 which means if I wanted to say three over four,
 I knew whether it was integers or floats
 and I could force that.
 And so, but in Python you just, what's the variable?
 And so it imputes the variable type
 from the result of that expression.
 Where C has got to declare X as a float
 or a double or an int.
 So when a C programmer writes a division,
 they need to know, they know already
 that they have to cast the values
 or use float constants
 to trigger type conversion and expressions.
 So as you're looking through the chapters
 seeing these type conversions and casting,
 that's the kind of problem that was solved.
 But then Python simplified it
 and then made it really kind of yucky
 and then they had to fix it.
 It's better in Python 3
 and most of you have just learned Python 3
 so consider yourself lucky.
 So another thing they talk about a lot
 and it has to do with as we start thinking
 about storage allocation on a bit by bit basis,
 we tend to need to know how to represent
 and print things out, not just in base 10.
 And it really has to do with the fact
 that base eight and base 16 are better
 at printing out binary data, raw data.
 10 is the number like where, you know,
 how many pizzas do you want?
 I want 16 pizzas or 22 pizzas.
 It's our natural, the way we think, the way humans think.
 So talk about, to talk about bases,
 let's start by just reviewing what base 10 means.
 There is, you know, the ones place and the tens place
 and of course later there's hundreds and thousands,
 but the four in 42 represents four tens.
 So you can think of it as four times 10, which is 40
 and then the ones place is two more.
 So 42 is 40 plus two, which is kind of redundant.
 We do that instinctively.
 So now let's take a look at base eight.
 So 42 in base 10 is 52 in base eight.
 And what base eight is really doing
 is it means that the digits in the two places
 means something different,
 meaning the five and 52 represents an eight.
 So there's five eights in this number
 that we're dealing with and two ones.
 And so five times eight is 40 and two times one is two.
 And so converting from 52 base eight to 52 base 10,
 we get to 42.
 And we used base eight and again,
 base eight lines up perfectly with base two
 'cause three base two digits equals one base eight digit.
 And I did a lot of base eight in the early days,
 but base 16 is really the way we tend to do it now
 'cause it's a little more dense.
 The rightmost place is still the ones
 and the next place is the 16s.
 So the two in the 16s place represents two times 16 or 32.
 And then what's left over is 10,
 which we represent with an A and 10 plus 32 is 42.
 Now the problem is, is we only have digits zero through nine.
 So by convention, 10 is A, 11 is B, 12 is C,
 13 is D, 14 is E and 15 is F.
 F is all the ones, it's four ones.
 I know that, I just like four ones.
 So I can convert hex from hex to base two,
 like very, very quickly.
 And if I need to look at a dump of some memory,
 I can dump it in hex and then when I need to,
 I can convert it to base two.
 So just converting back and forth
 between base 16 and base two is a bit of a trick.
 And I don't really care if you do much of this,
 you can grab this sample code and play with it.
 This is a conversion from base 10,
 a base number like one, two, three, four,
 to base eight and then base 16.
 And the way this one does it is it converts the number
 in effect from the rightmost number up to the low digit
 up to the high digit.
 And so what you do is you use the modulo function.
 And so you take your number one, two, three, four,
 and you take it modulo eight,
 and what's left over as a remainder is two.
 So that's the far right number in the new one.
 And then you chop it off with integer division,
 you chop that off and see what's left and that's 154.
 And you're accumulating the two in the converted number.
 And then you take the modulo of 154, modulo eight,
 and you get two, and then you chop off the next eight
 with integer divide by four and you get 19.
 So now your bottom two digits are two, two.
 And then you do 19 modulo eight and you get three.
 And that next digit from the right is a three.
 Then you divide by eight,
 integer divide by eight to get what's left over.
 And that's below eight.
 And so that the fourth digit from the right is a two.
 So one, two, three, four in base eight is two, three, two, two.
 And you can do the exact same thing.
 The difference is you gotta look up the digits
 because the base 16 needs the A, B, C, D, E, F.
 And so I make a little string.
 Now we're talking Python here.
 And so we do repeatedly modulo 16, integer divide by 16,
 modulo 16, integer divide by 16, modulo 16,
 integer divide by 16.
 And so we take one, two, three, four.
 And when we convert it to base 16,
 it kind of comes up from the bottom as two D four,
 which we read four D two.
 So that's just an algorithm that converts these.
 You tend to use this modulo.
 And that's how we can convert from one base to another.
 Now it's not critical in this class.
 We're not gonna spend a lot of time converting bases,
 but we just need to be aware that
 because there was so much awareness of how bits were stored,
 we tended to print a lot of stuff out
 in hexadecimal or in base eight.
 And so I just want you to know what those things are.
 So if you look, for example,
 at the ASCII chart that we've already seen,
 you see that it shows us that the letter A is 65,
 and in hex it's 41, and in octal it's 101,
 and in base two, or binary,
 it's one and a bunch of zeros and a one.
 And so this is just something that's making,
 and in the old days you had to be just much more aware
 of the real bits inside the computer,
 and hex and base eight, hex and octal,
 were better ways to sort of know what the bits were.
 So there you go.
 Now another thing that C really was
 one of the early innovative language
 was byte addressable computers, right?
 And so we don't think much, everything's a string,
 and we can look at the characters in the string.
 But in the old days, before C
 and the generation of computers that kind of triggered C,
 we didn't have characters.
 You couldn't, in the hardware, load a character.
 You could only load a word,
 and then you had to find the character within the word.
 And the language that really was the immediate precursor
 to C was the B language.
 And the difference was is the B language was a really cool,
 low-level word-oriented language,
 and then the C language came from B
 and became a byte-oriented language.
 And so C sort of like said, we're gonna do byte addressing.
 So if I take a look at the way I had to do character support
 in a CD6-6500, which is the computer I was using
 in like 1975, 1976, it was a scientific computer.
 It barely cared about printing characters.
 It didn't even have lowercase.
 It had 60-bit words and packed 6-bit uppercase characters
 into those words, and it used a series of zeros
 to fill it up.
 And so if I put the words Hello World into the CDC6500,
 it took two words, and Hello W-O-R-L
 was packed into the first word, and D was in the second one,
 and then we did what was called zero filling.
 The rest of those characters were all zeros,
 the integer zero, zero, zero, zero, zero, zero, zero, zero.
 And if I wanted to know what the fifth character
 of this two-word string was, like the O, for example,
 you would create a mask, and in that mask,
 you would have zeros where you wanted to get rid of stuff
 and ones where you wanted to copy stuff.
 So you would take Hello World and you'd run it
 through this mask with the bits in the right position,
 and then you would get the O and all zeros
 in the rest of the word, and then you would have to shift it
 half the way down, 'cause there were 10 characters,
 so you had to shift it five characters to the right,
 and then you would have the letter O
 in the bottom six bits of that word,
 and then I could write an if statement.
 That's how I would say if the fifth character
 is the letter O, I had to extract the fifth character
 by hand.
 So you can imagine how happy I was
 when I began to see programming languages
 that allowed me to use more of an array syntax
 and say strings of five, or even in this case,
 zero, one, two, three, four, strings of four,
 where I could treat characters as an array.
 The notion of a character array for me in 1977 was,
 what, why would you, you know, you couldn't do that, right?
 And so we, you know,
 a whole generation of programmers went,
 go through their entire career
 without having to do any masking and shifting.
 So this chapter's gonna talk to you about it,
 and you might say, well, if C was so good
 at doing it for you, why did they show it?
 And that is that people like me
 would not have had respect for this language
 if it weren't for the fact that they had
 a good masking and shifting,
 'cause we were doing that all the time
 in these word-oriented computers
 and word-oriented languages.
 And just as C and Unix were making
 the world safe for characters,
 then we had this other problem.
 And I'm only gonna talk a little bit about this.
 Just don't worry about it.
 The concept of indianess.
 So if you're loading words,
 do you load them with the least significant digits first,
 or the most significant digits first?
 And most computers were big-endian,
 and big-endian to us software developers
 made the most sense, 'cause that's how we thought
 it would lay out.
 But it turns out that a few processors wanted to load,
 if they were gonna do an add,
 they wanted to load the low end of the integer first
 so they could start the addition
 while they're bringing in the high end,
 and they could overlap the load and the add.
 And then Intel, which in those days
 wasn't all that popular,
 but they were so interested
 in the microprocessor performance
 that they became little-endian
 so that their loading and addition were fast.
 And so we've been stuck with
 a lot of little-endian microprocessors since then,
 and big-endian and little-endian,
 it's one of the harder things to solve, really.
 It really is.
 And so I'm gonna show you some code.
 I really, all I want you to do
 is feel sorry for those of us
 who had to figure out little-endian and big-endian.
 And let me just give you an outline
 of what this code is doing.
 I'm not gonna walk through it in detail.
 It just is kinda scary.
 So, and you're not even gonna understand
 most of this code until chapter five.
 It's just, let's just talk a little bit about the bits
 and how masking and shifting would have worked
 if we didn't have character arrays.
 So what I'm doing in this program
 is I'm creating a character array.
 The length of this character array
 is hello world plus one for the terminator,
 H-E-L-L-O space W-O-R-L-D.
 So 11 plus one should be 12 characters are allocated.
 And then what I'm doing in this next line
 that says int star S-I
 is I'm actually saying I wanna take the same storage
 and pretend it's an integer array.
 And so that's what that line is.
 It takes the address of the beginning of the first character
 and convert it from a pointer to a character,
 which is char S is a pointer to a character,
 and have it be a pointer to an integer.
 And again, I'm sort of like jumping ahead in chapter five.
 So I'm not expecting to understand all this.
 I'm just making you aware of it.
 So in those first two lines,
 I've got a character array and an integer array.
 Okay, and this is a 32-bit integer.
 And so that means that the characters are stuck
 into 32-bit integers in a little endian way.
 And so if you look, that means that
 if you just look at memory from left to right,
 that the lowest of the first four, which is 32 bits,
 the first character that comes out is the L, right?
 And you can see the little endian,
 which in your mind thinks it should be shifted,
 but that's because this is running on a little endian computer.
 And different computers will give you different results.
 And this is a little endian example.
 And so you can see with masking and shifting
 where I'm gonna try to get the E out,
 which would normally be the second character,
 but it's kind of the second from the bottom
 of the first integer.
 And so what I do is I make a mask
 and I'm gonna print this out.
 I take FF, which is eight bits of ones,
 and then I shift it up eight characters to the left.
 And you can see that in the printout.
 And then I mask out that character, which is the E,
 but then it's in the wrong position.
 And then I have to take that masked result
 and I have to shift it back down eight
 so that it's in the bottom part.
 So now I can check to see what that letter is.
 This is how I would pull out the second character
 of a string so I could check to see if it's an E,
 because I can't compare directly
 the second character of string, right?
 And Python, you're like, why are we doing this?
 And that's why you build a string class
 instead of use a character array for this.
 And I've made it even worse by starting
 with taking a character array and viewing it
 as an integer array, and then playing with the integers.
 So, you don't have to understand this.
 Just be thankful that you use Python.
 And if you don't use Python, you use C.
 And whether it's a big-endian or a little-endian machine,
 you can treat an array of characters
 as an array of characters, and you can get the third one
 or the fifth one with a square bracket notation, okay?
 Storage allocation, storage allocation, storage allocation.
 So a summary of this lecture is we talked
 about number-based conversion.
 We talked a little bit about division,
 why the Python 2 integer division happened.
 I don't really have a really good answer for that.
 Concept of integers and words and bytes
 and masking and shifting and characters.
 Just because these topics are covered in this chapter,
 and they will feel very foreign to you and unnatural.
 But just give 'em a shot, read through 'em,
 understand them, and they'll make sense later.
 Later, we're gonna learn about structures
 and pointers and addresses advancing and stuff like that.
 It'll all make a lot more sense coming up.
 (gentle music)
