 So now we're going to dive into the notion of abstractions.
 We're going to take an interface and kind of compare it
 across a number of different languages. We're going to call this abstraction a map.
 A map is a common term that we use kind of abstractly to describe key value collections.
 And each different language tends to have a different name for that.
 C++, they actually call it a map. Python calls it a dictionary.
 Java also calls it a map, but with an uppercase.
 And in PHP, we call it arrays. And in JavaScript, they're actually objects.
 And then we're going to look at the iterator pattern
 as an abstraction for looping across multiple implementations.
 So let's take a look at some sample Python code that's playing with a dictionary class.
 So we created a dictionary at the very beginning.
 Then we filled it up with some key value pairs.
 And so you'll notice that like D sub z equals 8 and D sub z equals 1.
 That's got to be a replacement. So there's no 8 in there after that second replacement.
 We then print it. Then we do a get of z to see if it's there.
 And then we do a get of x, and it's not there. So we see x equals 42 when it executes.
 Then we say, give me an iterator of the items in this dictionary.
 And so what that basically is going to do is the iterator itself is not a list.
 In earlier versions, like Python 2, when you asked for the items, you tended to get
 a fully filled out list. But that's a waste of memory.
 So the iterator is simply a data structure that is keeping track of where in the list we are.
 And then we call it next over and over and over to advance through the iterator.
 So we don't have to make a complete copy of all the data.
 We just have a little pointer that advances through.
 So items is a relatively small data structure.
 I mean, it doesn't include all the data in the dictionary.
 It just is itself a pointer to something. It's all internal.
 Remember, abstraction is like, hey, I can give you the next thing.
 Internally, there's pointers and all kinds of crazy things inside these iterators,
 which we shall soon see.
 So if you print out items, you will see that it's like an item iterator for dictionaries.
 That's what that class dict item iterator is telling us.
 But then we can call the next function, which is built into Python, and say, hey, iterator,
 do your job and hand me back the next thing.
 Or if we reach the end of the dictionary, false.
 Now, if you come in any order, these have any order dictionaries, of course.
 But we get back the entry or we get back false.
 So we say, while entry, then we print the entry.
 And then we say, hey, give me the next one.
 And then loop up to the top.
 And when it becomes false, we're all done.
 And so what you see, because this is an order dictionary,
 is you see z1, x9, b3, a4, and then it finishes.
 So we don't know about next, arrow next.
 We don't know even the-- in this case, we're just getting a tuple back.
 So we do know that.
 But if we take a look at the same kind of concept in PHP,
 we make an array and we fill it up.
 z gets to be 8, z gets to be 1.
 And that's an overwrite.
 And then we put three more things in.
 And we can print them out.
 We see that it's kind of an order dictionary, as it were.
 x, z, y, b, a.
 And then we do a get.
 And we're using the null coalesce operator, which is the double question mark.
 So we say, give me a sub z.
 And if that doesn't exist, then give me back 42.
 So it's kind of like a get.
 But that's a PHP 7 and later.
 So we look up x, and we don't get it.
 So we see x equals 42.
 And then we run through an iterator.
 And again, there are structures inside of arrays.
 But we know nothing about how PHP implemented the arrays.
 We just know that if we say, for each a, as key is assigned a value,
 we can print out k and v.
 And so this is a very abstract way of saying, I want to go through all of them.
 I want the keys and values.
 Give those back to me.
 But I don't care how you do it, whether you make extra copies of data, et cetera.
 So that's another iterator pattern.
 Now, in C, the data structure we create is a map.
 And if you read this, you'll see that it talks about how the implementations work,
 et cetera, et cetera, et cetera.
 But the C++ equivalent of a dictionary is, in effect, a map.
 And so this is some C++ code.
 The first thing we see is we're going to create a map.
 And in this less than, greater than syntax,
 you're seeing that the map is mapping a string to an integer.
 So the key, in this case, is a string.
 And the value is an integer.
 The previous two languages didn't care so much about types.
 And so that's why they-- but now we're in C++, which cares greatly about types.
 And so now we say mp sub z equals 8.
 Then mp sub z equals 1, which, again, is a replace operator.
 Then y, b, and a are set to 2, 3, and 4, respectively.
 And then we do like a get operation.
 And this one is a little funky in C.
 Why they didn't give us a get operation, I do not know.
 But what this is using as a ternary operation is saying mp count.
 How many z keys are inside this thing?
 And if it's greater than 0, we print out mp sub z.
 And if it's not greater than 0-- if it's 0, then we print out 42,
 which functions like a Python get on a dictionary.
 So this syntax is funky.
 You can go like Google it.
 It's like there's two ways you can do it.
 And neither of them makes me particularly happy.
 Because I think that for a map-like object,
 a get with a default is pretty valuable.
 The notion of running through and counting means you found it or didn't find it.
 And if you found it, why don't you give it back to me?
 But they just don't have a get.
 But now we see an iteration.
 So it says for auto.
 Auto is a type, but it's an automatic type.
 And it knows that this mp is a map string int.
 And so it creates this current pointer, which is a pointer to--
 not exactly a map string, it's a map entry.
 But we don't care about that.
 There's actually a type.
 Curr, the variable curr, has a type.
 Whatever the mp begin is going to give us back as a type.
 And it knows that based on map string int.
 And it makes curr the right type.
 So this is like whatever type you want.
 But it is not any type.
 It's a very precise type.
 And that's a sort of a hallmark of C++, is all the types are very, very precise.
 So it's a for loop.
 You see the three semicolons?
 The initialization clause, auto curr equals mp begin, says, hey, we've got our iterator.
 Get me started.
 Begin.
 Go to the beginning of it.
 And give me the first one.
 And as long as curr is not equal to mp end, there are no more.
 That's kind of like their null.
 And then plus plus curr.
 So we're incrementing curr.
 And then there's a key and a value.
 And they don't call them key and value.
 They call them first and second.
 That's the thing coming back from mp begin has an attribute first and an attribute second.
 And we call the c_str to convert that to a C string.
 So I can use printf.
 So I don't have to use cout.
 Just because I don't know why.
 I didn't want to use cout in this one.
 But you see an abstraction where the first and the second are known.
 But because this is a key and a value, it's not such a big deal.
 And so that's doing the same thing in C++.
 In Java, they have an interface.
 And you see the word interface here.
 An interface named map less than greater than k comma v.
 And just like in C++, this is saying a map is a key and a value.
 But what we're putting in here is the type of the key and the type of the value.
 So we're going to make a map that has a string key and an integer value.
 You might say why didn't I do string string?
 And that's because it makes it just easier when I'm writing so much C code.
 It also will be fun when we actually count things, if you remember.
 From a long time ago, we did count it.
 But map is the class.
 And string integer, this is kind of polymorphism where it can be a map.
 It maps strings to integers, or integers to strings, or strings to strings,
 or who knows what to who knows what else.
 Meaning this map is exceedingly flexible.
 And it doesn't care what kind of type it's using.
 As long as the type meets some basic criteria.
 So here's a bit of Java code that does the same thing that we've been doing.
 And so we see that we're going to make this variable map, lowercase,
 is of type map, map of strings to integers.
 And we're going to create a new tree map of strings to integers.
 And the new creates a new object.
 Now the difference between a map and a tree map is a map is an interface
 and a tree map is an implementation.
 The tree map says we're going to build this key value store,
 but we're going to store our data in a tree.
 And that says to a computer scientist
 that it's going to have a certain performance and memory footprint.
 Trees are a great way to store key value data.
 But they take a little bit more memory than a linked list, as we will later see.
 And so we're choosing an implementation.
 The other thing where it says tree map that you might use is what's called a hash map.
 Which is a simpler map implementation, but doesn't keep things in order.
 So you can choose.
 The map doesn't change, but you can say I'd like this to be a tree map or a hash map.
 They're both key value stores.
 One is an ordered key value store and a hash map is an unordered key value store.
 And they both have different performance behaviors and internal implementation details.
 But it doesn't matter because they're both maps.
 In this code that we write, we could literally change tree map to hash map
 and the code will work exactly the same.
 But the order of the key value pairs might be a little bit different.
 Now you'll notice that when we're putting stuff in, we call a method, map.put.
 So everything we've seen so far says like map open bracket quote z quote close bracket equals 8.
 Java chose not to do what's called operator overloading.
 And so it really does everything in a method.
 So the kind of things that you think are going to be done with an assignment statement
 or some other syntax tend to be done.
 It's like, OK, we're going to do everything with methods and parameters.
 Now map is the object instance that's being worked on.
 And z, that's basically saying map sub z equals 8.
 And we'll do in a put of z of 1, which is going to overwrite.
 You'll see I'm doing the same thing in each one of these things.
 And then put in y, b, and a with 2, 3, and 4 respectively.
 I can print it out.
 And if you look at the printout, it looks a lot like what it looks like in Python.
 There's this thing called get or default, map.get or default,
 which is if the key z is in there, give it to the value.
 Or just give me 42 as a default.
 And in the first case, z is there.
 In the second case, x is not there.
 So you see x is 42.
 That's not a bad name for it.
 It's a little more verbose than get.
 It's pretty much the same as what we do in Python.
 And then we have an iterator.
 And now you see in this for loop, you see kind of the notion of the fact
 that the iteration variable has a type.
 So we don't have this auto.
 Later versions of Java may have an auto.
 But now I'm explicitly showing you.
 It's not a map string integer.
 It's a map.entry, which is an entry inside of a map.
 It's an abstract interface to the entry inside of a map.
 Each entry that's got to match the string integer that's in the map.
 And so there's a map string integer, which is the whole map.
 And then there's a map entry, which is one of the entries.
 But this map entry is also kind of an iterator, right?
 So we're going to iterate and move forward.
 So it's not just the key and the value.
 It's really the key and the value and the position.
 But we don't see the position.
 All we know is we use this for syntax, which is kind of like a for in in Python.
 And we call map.entry set, which is I want a set of all the entries.
 And that map entry set does not construct a giant in memory list
 and then go through it.
 That actually creates a single map entry with the key and the value of the first one.
 And then you hit it again.
 And it gives you the second one.
 You hit it again.
 It gives the third one.
 And pretty soon it gives you null.
 Which means that the loop is going to stop.
 And the entry itself does have a key and a value.
 Now, key and value are known in the map entry interface.
 So you say entry.getKey and entry.getValue.
 Now, they're using methods to give us back the key and the value
 versus in previous things you saw attributes being used in the iterators.
 And that's because Java is obsessed with preferring to use accessor methods
 like getters and setters versus just grabbing attributes.
 And the key thing is they can add just a little bit of business logic if they want
 rather than having to do something and have the key and the value
 already completely computed sitting in an attribute for you to use.
 Entry.getKey, sometimes it just grabs something that's already got computed
 or it might actually go do something or do some work.
 And so by putting these things in what Java calls getters and setters,
 in this case we're not seeing a setter so much.
 But making it so that instead of it being entry.key,
 it's entry.getKey open print close print.
 That's a very Java way of thinking about this.
 So we started by talking about a simple Python dictionary where we fill it up,
 we use get, then we create an iterator,
 and then we abstractly loop through that iterator.
 And that's what we wanted to accomplish in this section
 just to see how that is done in a wide range of different languages.
 Because the map abstraction is kind of like this thing
 that we use as software developers, and then it's a kind of a sealed thing,
 and then underneath it all the magic happens.
