 - Hello, welcome to chapter three.
 I'm Charles Severance, and I'm your instructor.
 So here in chapter three, again, I want you to read the book.
 I'm just gonna call your attention to a few of the
 unique things that might help you make more sense of the book.
 So we're gonna talk about semicolon use,
 how it started in C and is used across multiple languages,
 how else if is a little different across languages,
 the switch statement and a bit of motivation
 why the switch statement is even in C,
 is a comma, I don't know, operator, separator,
 and then sort of this tendency towards excessive succinctness
 or brevity that is pretty common in C programming, right?
 It just, it's like there's such a value
 in making things really, really short,
 and that makes it kind of different.
 So I love semicolon-based languages,
 and we have a whole bunch of semicolon-based languages
 that we've learned and are going to learn.
 Certainly 1978, the C programming language
 with its non-syntactically important spacing.
 The key to C is that C, the semicolon, is a terminator,
 and every statement must be terminated by a semicolon.
 So we say x equals x plus one semicolon,
 and x equals x divided by two semicolon, right?
 And that's the idea, the printf ends in a semicolon.
 So you may or may not know, in Python,
 you're allowed to have semicolons.
 They're pretty much optional,
 like on the print open paren x closed paren,
 that semicolon does not need to be there.
 But it is a separator, not a terminator.
 So you can think of the print open paren x
 closed paren semicolon as one statement
 followed by a separator followed by an empty statement,
 which does nothing.
 But the interesting thing is you can put
 more than one line on one line.
 You can put more than one line of code
 by using a separator.
 So there I say x equals x plus one semicolon,
 x equals x over two semicolon.
 I don't have to indent that.
 I just, it's two lines in the same block of code,
 and that's legal.
 Most of the time, people choose not to use semicolon.
 The other thing about that is that shell scripting,
 which is sort of the Linux automation,
 treats it as a separator.
 And so that sort of looks a bit like shell scripting
 to have multiple statements on the same line
 separated by semicolons.
 In Java, it tends to follow the C pattern
 where it's a terminator.
 I tend to like it as a terminator.
 I don't like the idea that you can leave it off
 the way JavaScript does.
 And so you see it's on two assignment statements
 and the system out printlin in Java.
 In PHP, PHP follows C very closely.
 And so it is a terminator there as well.
 And so I think that's natural.
 And the good news, if it's a separator,
 like in JavaScript in the next example,
 where it's separating it.
 And so in this case, the x equals x divided by two
 does not need to be terminated
 'cause the closed curly brace is gonna terminate that.
 And like even the console.log, open paren, closed paren,
 semicolon, that semicolon is optional.
 When I tend to write JavaScript,
 I tend to put semicolons everywhere.
 When I tend to write Python, I put semicolons nowhere.
 And then in PHP and Java,
 I tend to put semicolons everywhere.
 Even though sometimes there are things you can leave out.
 Another thing that is very, very subtle
 is the notion of else if.
 So C predates Python.
 And C in this book shows else if
 as two separate words.
 And there's an else keyword and an if keyword.
 And so you say else space if.
 And then you have the expression and another statement.
 Else space if expression and another statement.
 And then else for the one
 where none of those expressions are true.
 And if you look at Python, it looks almost identical.
 It says if expression, then elif expression,
 elif expression and else.
 The key is that elif is a separate language construct
 in Python.
 And I think it's actually really beautiful and elegant.
 And the key is that this else if,
 while it is, I can think of it in C
 as like indented incorrectly.
 So you can look at it as the very first if
 has an if and an else.
 And everything from the second if on down
 is really part of that else.
 And so if you look to the right,
 you see the curly braces
 with the indentation that's explicit.
 It's exactly the same thing.
 But what you're going to see is you can see that it's,
 if you were gonna truly correctly indent
 an if, else if, else if, else in C,
 you would indent it the way it's shown on the right side.
 And it's neither here nor there.
 Very, very, it is very rare
 that you would see any C programmer, you know,
 do all the indentation the technically right way.
 But I just want to call your attention to it
 that it's different than eleph.
 Eleph is its own language element
 that is not a deeper nesting,
 deeper and deeper nesting.
 If you were to nest it,
 you see on the right hand side,
 you see I've got three closed curly braces.
 Curly brace, curly brace, curly brace.
 And it's just, ugh.
 So the eleph, I think, is a really elegant addition
 that Python has added.
 Thus, which statement?
 (sighs)
 I think that the reason that the authors
 put the switch statement into C
 is there was a time where we would write code
 in assembly language using what we call a jump table,
 where we take sort of the, take a number,
 maybe take it, mask it so it's only from zero through 16,
 and then look up a series of addresses
 and jump through a jump table.
 And the computed go-to was the way in Fortran
 of expressing a jump table.
 But in Fortran, it was just a mess.
 You got these labels and columns one through six,
 and the continue statement doesn't work like the continuing
 in C and C-like languages.
 And you had to have these go-tos
 to get out of the switch statement.
 If you think about it
 from an assembly language perspective,
 it's not that hard to build the computed go-to
 with a little tiny jump table.
 And so I think to some degree,
 whether or not we have to use a jump table in modern C
 is really, it's really, really rare
 where you have to use a jump table.
 We just would do a few repeating LSIFs, and it's just fine.
 Back then, a few extra statements might have bothered
 something if you were gonna do it a million times,
 you know, a million times a minute or something.
 The switch statement is much prettier.
 You do have to put the break statements in there.
 You can kind of nest the, you have the stack cases,
 and then there's a default case.
 So if I, at least I compare the C switch statement
 with the Fortran computed go-to,
 I wanna say that the C switch statement
 was pretty much a lot more elegant,
 a lot easier to use, a lot easier to understand.
 And because assembly language programmers of the time
 did think in terms of jump tables,
 if a high-level language didn't have a way
 to express a jump table in that language,
 then we would kind of think of it as missing.
 But frankly, you know, in your programming,
 I'm not sure I've written a switch statement in,
 'cause Java has a switch statement too.
 I probably haven't written a switch statement
 in over 20 years and maybe more.
 So I like the fact that it improved on Fortran,
 but that doesn't mean that you should use it.
 The comma operator or comma separator,
 I like to think of it as like a light version
 of the semicolon.
 And most people almost never use it,
 and the only place we use it is when it is sort of idiomatic,
 where in a for statement,
 because we're already using semicolon
 to separate the start before the loop,
 the loop test, and then the loop increment per iteration,
 we're using semicolon for that.
 So if we wanna do like two statements,
 we are gonna like, oh, i equals zero,
 j equals strlen s minus one,
 with a comma in between to say,
 do these two things before the loop starts.
 And then at the end, you say i plus plus comma j minus minus,
 that says do these two things at the end of each loop.
 So I only see it in idiomatic situations.
 Just think of it as like we couldn't use a semicolon here.
 It functions exactly like a semicolon,
 although the syntax already has a semicolon in it.
 So I think it's actually a pretty clever way to say,
 I wanna put two statements in here.
 Maybe you could put curly braces in there or something,
 but I thought the comma was a pretty cool thing.
 Another problem is that there was just this notion
 that we, as assembly language programmers,
 we could do things like be smart
 and leave some value in a register
 and then check the register a couple of different ways,
 and that would lead to really succinct, fast code.
 Hand-tuned code where you might have to look at it
 to figure out what it's doing,
 but then you realize, well, I did that in six statements
 rather than 12 statements.
 12 statements might have made more sense,
 but the six statements were really fast.
 And in the early days, in the early '70s,
 they were changing their compilers so fast
 and changing their hardware so fast
 that they really didn't build
 super great optimizing compilers.
 So they would look at the source code
 that came out of the compiler
 and they're like, I could do better than that.
 So there was a lot of a kind of comparison
 of the source code between what the C compiler would generate
 and whatever, and so they found over time
 that if they would kind of use these tricks
 that told the compiler to take this C equals getchar
 and leave the C in a register and compare it to a space,
 and then compare it again to a new line
 and compare it again to a tab, we would think,
 oh, I can see how that would run in assembly language.
 And I can hope that the compiler
 would generate the assembly language
 that would make me happy.
 And then another pattern you see in this
 is the number four thing where all the work's been done
 in the loop test, and so while loop,
 that whole big expression is just the test
 to know when it's done, but it's actually reading the data,
 comparing it three times, storing it in a variable,
 and when that's all done, there's nothing to do in the loop,
 and so that's why you say close paren semicolon.
 And you'll see a lot of those things,
 especially when doing string stuff
 where you're sort of zooming through an array
 and you did it all in the for loop
 and you don't really have anything to do in the for loop.
 And again, we're thinking in the early days
 of how this is gonna translate into assembly language,
 and so you're trying to make that loop really, really small.
 And again, it's amazing how often they looked
 at the resulting assembly language
 in a non-optimizing compiler situation
 and then wondered if the compiler could have done better.
 So that gets us going in this chapter.
 We talked about the semicolon,
 we talked about the switch statement,
 the else if, subtle syntax difference between Python and C,
 the comma, and just get used to the notion
 that it's obtuse code.
 Please don't write obtuse code.
 These days, the optimizers are so great,
 and so don't write obtuse code,
 but don't be too upset as you read the textbook
 and see obtuse code.
 (gentle music)
 (upbeat music)
