 Hello and welcome to the lecture in C Programming for Everybody that I call The Epilogue.
 And that's because this lecture happened after the course was completely finished. I have a saying
 in my life that basically says that when you think you are finished with a journey,
 often that's when you finally know where the journey actually begins. And that applies in C
 Programming for Everybody because C Programming for Everybody for me was a four and a half year
 project to create the book, create the auto graders, create the lectures, get it up on Coursera,
 get it out on the internet, etc. And so I just was going through the class and at some point I ran
 into chapter six of Carnegie and Ritchie and I'm like what will some good examples to use,
 what are some good examples that I can use that will be relevant to the students who perhaps have
 taken Python for Everybody. And I'm like well why don't we just implement some Python classes, we'll
 see how complex they get, and if they get, if what works out well it talks about the concept of
 interfaces and implementations, you know, and so I think it worked out really really well. And so as
 we were going through chapter six of Carnegie and Ritchie, I built us a Python String class and you
 can go back and you can watch those other ones as an extendable character array with some chunking
 where it would allocate some space and then fill that space up and as that space filled up it would
 extend it. And I made a list class and I used the linked list from Carnegie and Ritchie chapter six.
 If you recall, I made an extra little bonus section 6.5.1 where I talked about linked list
 explicitly because in the original Carnegie and Ritchie 1978 book, and I believe it's the
 same in the 84, but I'm like I'm going to show you linked lists first and so I added this little
 piece to the the Canon, the Carnegie and Ritchie Canon, I added that. I implemented the Python
 dictionary using the technique of Carnegie and Ritchie 6.6, pretty much straight on. When I built
 the Python String class, you'll notice that there's a structure that has a length and an alloc and the
 alloc is how many characters we allocated and the length is how many of those we've used and we're
 putting automatically a zero byte at the end of it. As you add things together, eventually you get
 the length to be nine with a zero byte and the alloc is 10, which means we can't add the letter D
 and so we use realloc to extend it and make it be 20 and then we have space to put both the letter D
 and the end of String. We built the Python List class. It was so natural to just make it be a
 linked list and linked list has two structs. One is the linked list itself that has a head pointer
 and a tail pointer and a number of items that lets us give back len when we need to give len back,
 but then every node we're going to just have a list of character strings or character arrays
 and so we have a pointer to a character array and then we have a pointer to the next and so when we
 sort of do our constructor, we allocate the object and then we set the head and the tail to null to
 indicate that the list is currently empty and set the count to zero and we're done. And then as we
 add things to the list, right, we have these pointers and we point the head to the beginning
 of the list, the tail to the last item that we added and we store using malloc the strings so
 that we get a pointer to a string that the list owns rather than the parameter which doesn't belong
 to us and then we hook the next up and there's a little tricky stuff, right? If the string is empty,
 which means head is null, then we just point head at the newly allocated node. If the tail is not
 null, we take the last thing and point it to the one we just made and set tail to new and then we
 allocate the string and then copy the text from the parameter into text and then we store that
 as a pointer and then we update our count. Like if we add another one, you have to kind of graph the
 new one in beyond the tail so the tail instead of being null now points to the one we just created,
 the fun, and then we update tail to point to that and then the next on that one is zero because
 that's our way of ending the list. And if we're going to iterate through this list, we start at
 the head, look at the item, then we go to next and then we'll look at that item and then go to next
 and look at that item and go to next and it's null and we're done. Again, we were able to build a
 quite competent Python list object from that. And as you might expect, when we switch to building
 the dictionary class, we just go into section 6.6 and go in and make a hash table with buckets and
 it's literally the hash, the bucket-based hash map is probably the most common programming
 interview question. Perhaps it's less common now because everyone knows that it's a programming
 interview question, right? And so, you know, I just figured of course a dictionary is going to be a
 set of buckets that are a set of pointers to lists. You know, recall that hashes are some function
 that takes the key and creates a large pseudo-random number which means it's deterministic but it's
 widely distributed with the idea of to limit collisions. So John Smith and Joe Smith hopefully
 will hash differently even though they're very close, right? And so the way we did this, again,
 following Kernigan and Ritchie, is we used the key computed a hash which is a large integer generally
 but then we modulo it based on the number of buckets and so the buckets are in a sense four
 linked lists. And if we wanted to write this code in a way, we could have kind of used the list object
 and said here and be a little bit less repetitive but we just implemented the whole thing.
 So if you look, we start with a struct krdict which has a number of buckets. It has four heads
 and four tails and a count. And so it's just heads and tails of the way you do linked lists.
 And if you look at the node, we're going to do key and value and I'm going to make it be a string key
 and an integer value again to simplify, right? And the char star key is a pointer to a key that
 we're going to save. And if we look at the new operation, we allocate the actual dictionary
 object. We decide how many buckets we're going to have. The way I define struct krdict, it's just a
 four element array. Then we set them all to null so that we know that they're empty because it's
 important to know if the heads and tails and each of the linked lists are empty. Now one thing is
 this doesn't have any expansion mechanism and so I just wanted to keep it really simple to show you
 the data structure so I kind of like punted on rehashing an expansion. And then we set the count
 to zero and then we return it. As we're inserting things in, right, we use the hash to figure it out
 and then we simply have four linked lists. So if you were to compare the krlist code to the krdict
 code, you would see that a lot of it looks the same except we're starting with a head that has
 been chosen by a hash computation along with modulo based on the number of buckets. As I finished
 all that up and I finished the class up, I wondered, I began to really wonder. I looked,
 I started looking at it less from a C and KNR, Kernigan-Ritchie perspective, and more from a
 Python perspective and I'm like did I just inadvertently do exactly what Guido van Rossum
 did? Did Guido van Rossum read this book like most of us did in the 70s and 80s and did he just say
 you know what I'm going to make a list object and it's going to be a linked list and I'm going to
 make a hash object and it's going to be a set of buckets, linked lists and buckets like everybody
 would do. So I decided I would ask Guido if I could come out to him and see him and talk to him
 about the influence that Kernigan and Richie chapter 6 had on his design of Python and in
 particular was my guess because I didn't look at the Python code to do this. I was really teaching
 Kernigan and Richie chapter 6 and so up next we have the first of two interviews with Guido
 asking about how he built his structures and whether or not my structures that I had just
 guessed and assumed were even close and so we started the interview with me handing him a copy
 of the Kernigan and Richie c-book which was signed and I left it with him and saying you know skim
 through chapter 6 and tell me how chapter 6 affected how you built the original version of Python.
