 So now I want to talk to you about the Python 1.0 dictionary as built by Guido back in 1989-1991.
 And this sample code is available under /code and it's the epilogue code and it's p1dict.c.
 So the key thing is is that instead of reading the C programming book and KNR in chapter 6,
 Guido van Rossum was reading page 518 of a much earlier document which is more about pure data
 structures and algorithms. And so this was kind of like our bible on how to write good fast code
 and this was our bible on how to write sophisticated algorithms. So Guido found this
 and he decided he didn't want to make linked lists and that's partly because of his experience in
 ABC. And so this is open hashing using an array. So this is an array based hash concept and in the
 bucket styles there's an array of hash link lists and so this is an array that actually
 everything is stored in the array rather than a pointer to things that are outside the array.
 The key in open addressing is how you probe and find open slots when your initial hash
 leads to a collision in hashes. We try to make hashes not collide but they can't collide.
 And so this is basically it uses a circular iteration and it actually if you look at there
 at L3 it's subtracting one and if it's less than zero set i to i plus m go back to step L2.
 It's probably just easier to show you a picture of what's going on. So let's imagine that we've got
 an array of eight key value pairs and this is literally an array. In our case these will become
 pointers. Key will be a pointer, value will be a pointer but Knuth is not thinking about that.
 As far as Knuth is concerned everything is just a variable. So it's an array of key value pairs
 and the key thing to the hash it's the same hash computation and the same modulo operation
 that looks at the number of buckets. But when it picks a slot in that the array that slot is just
 where we hope to store it but if that's already occupied we got to find another place. And we
 presuppose that there's always space and we'll talk about how that ends up getting solved later
 with rehashing. But the key is is we got to figure out where we want to put it assuming that there's
 space and linear probing algorithm is you start going backwards. So you go from three to two and
 is that available? Great, use it. If two is not available go to one, go to zero. And if you get
 to zero you've got to go all the way to the end. This is kind of a circular list. Eventually it's
 going to visit all eight entries but it's going to start at whatever entry the hash indicated it's
 supposed to start. And the whole purpose of the hash is to get to the entry that has the key and
 value in question more rapidly or to know that it's not there. And the way you know that it's
 not there is you run this loop and when you find a key and a value of zero which means it's empty
 then you know that it's not there and you also know where you're supposed to put it. So if we
 look at the data structures that I wrote to implement this Python 1 dictionary we have a
 denode which is just a pointer to a key and a pointer to a value because we're going to do
 strings key value pairs to simplify this. The dictionary itself has the size of the array,
 the alloc which we've been using all along, count or length, I switch back and forth in some of this
 code, and then an array of DNodes. Now remember that that's a struct. So if we look at the
 constructor we allocate the dictionary, we set its length which is the number of things in it
 to zero, and we set the alloc which is the size of the space we can store things to two. And then
 we allocate our two item array of struct DNodes and then we have to mark them. We can't just assume
 they're zeros when we get it back from malloc. Some mallocs give us zeros, some mallocs don't,
 but in this case we need to no matter what ensure that we have them marked as null because our null
 is an indication of emptiness so that later when we're looking around we can find which areas are
 empty. And so if we take a look at the put, the hash tells us where to look and we put this all
 in p1 dict find which does the hash computation and does the modulo of the number of buckets
 and gives us back a pointer to the DNode in question. Now this pointer is either where that
 key belongs and already exists or it's where that key belongs and it's empty. Now if we found an
 empty slot we don't have to allocate the DNode because it's already the array. We just have to
 set up the key with a malloc and a copy, set up the value with a malloc and a copy, and then record
 the fact that we now have one key value pair in our array. We're going to use this not only to
 return like len but also to know when we filled it up because when len gets to be the size of
 alloc it's full and we'll talk more about that in a second. So that's what it looks like after
 we've inserted one key value pair. Now let's say we're getting a put request for a key that's
 already in there so we're going to say z equals w instead of catchphrase. So we run p dict underscore
 find and it comes back and it says here's your thing but the difference is you look and the key
 the one it's pointing to the one it gave us back the one it found already has a key. Now you might
 think that's bad news. No it's great news. It means z already has a slot and then all we have to do
 is update the value because dictionaries function like assignment statements. If you have z that has
 catchphrase and then we get z equals w you just you're supposed to store w and then throw catchphrase
 away and so that's you see it do that right it it frees old value which was catchphrase and then
 mallocs the new one and then stir copies into it and now at the end of this one we still have a
 length of one and z maps to w in our hash mat. So now let's add let's do another put let's say y
 equals b we're going to do p dict underscore find and it's going to hash the value y it's going to
 give us back position one now that could be because it hashed to position zero and linear probing found
 its way to position one or maybe it hashed to position one it just doesn't matter p dict find
 says look this is the best possible place to store y in this particular array.
 So now at the end of that we will have z and y and we have an alloc of two and a length of two
 but now let's say we want to insert c so the problem is is that we're full which means that
 p dict underscore find is not going to find one it whatever it hashes to it's going to look through
 all the rest of them but there's no space there's no space in the array so what we have to do is if
 it's not there and we're out of space we have to expand items that is the code what we call rehashing
 so let's take a look at the rehashing code we'll look at this in some detail at the high level we
 store the size and the array of items in old alloc and old items respectively then we double
 the size that's just how we do it and then we allocate a brand new array of d nodes in this
 case four d nodes get allocated and that's in items and then we do some code that pretty much
 looks like it came from the constructor we're going to take those four nodes four d nodes and
 we're going to set their key and value to null because at this point we're kind of like halfway
 through reorganizing this thing our old items are available to us but new items are empty that means
 that we can use find and do inserting into the new one and so that's what we're going to do
 before we throw old alloc away we're just going to write a simple for loop to go through them now
 we've got to check to see if old item sub i is null because when we're done with this we're not
 just going to wait till it's 100 full we're going to actually reallocate when it's 70 full if old
 item sub i is null dot key is null that means it's empty we don't have to reinsert it that's all we're
 saying is we don't have to reinsert it but if we find one then we go and ask the p1 dict underscore
 find where to put it and in this case we're only going to always get a new slot because
 keys are unique which means we can go through all the old item keys and never hit the same one twice
 and there will always be space because we just alloc a thing that's twice as big as the thing
 it's coming from so there was two and we've allocated it for it we will always find a place
 to put it because the keys are unique think about it for just a minute and then we just say key equal
 and value equals copy and we don't have to reallocate them or anything they're just pointers
 to the saved strings that are key and value and then the only thing we throw away is old items
 and so you know it's it's it's it's kind of pretty now the last thing where we say old equals p1
 dict find self key we used old before to figure out that oh wait a sec we need to make some more
 space so we have to then find where the incoming key because we're in the middle of an insert
 right now so we have to know in the new items where that belongs and so that's why we say that
 so if we take a look at the moment where we're inserting the c key we've got we're full up we've
 got two allocated right and we're looking we're saying where should we put c and the answer is
 you can't so now we drop in to the reallocation code so the first thing the reallocation code does
 is make a copy of old items and old alec so there's the two items z and y are there and then what we
 do is we double the size and make an empty array of four d nodes and set their key and value to null
 and so we kind of have the old array and the new array sitting around right now so then what we do
 is we start looping through the old array and we see oh z equals w so we just run a simple hash
 calculation and say where does z belong in the new items and then we put it in there now we don't
 have to deallocate or reallocate the actual z or the actual w we just have to change the pointers
 now you'll notice at this moment we've got a pointer in the top one and the bottom one that's
 pointing to the same allocated memory that's a reference count problem but we're going to throw
 old items away in just a bit so we loop through that right so we find the z and we put the z in
 the right spot remember we're still in the middle of trying to insert c we've kind of temporarily
 paused and clean or cleaning up our hash map to give us space to insert so then we go through
 the loop again and now we find that the y belongs in position three y equals b goes into position
 three and now we're at the point where what we have done we're still again trying to insert c
 but we have to first make space now we're kind of done with old items we've got pointers in the new
 items that point to the key value pairs and we can actually just throw that away not only when
 we throw that away it not only throws away the array itself but it really kind of resolves our
 problem that we had two pointers pointing to the same thing which leads us to like memory leaks
 potentially but now we've cleaned our mess up we've freed the old items we're still in the middle of
 inserting c and this is one of the like downsides to hashing is this cleanup phase can take a little
 while i just moved everything around so it looks like what we had before and now that we've got
 this thing rehashed and we've got our z equals w and y equals b in an array that is for long rather
 than too long we are ready to continue with the insertion of c so we say okay where does c belong
 we run the hash again with the pdict underscore find of the c key and it says that belongs in two
 and again it might be in two because it's empty it might be in two because something was not empty
 and we did collision resolution but it doesn't matter when it comes back from find remember
 it's bigger so there's always going to be space so we don't have to worry too much about there not
 being space but now we got an empty slot and we can put that value in and put the key in and and
 update it so that there are three items the length becomes three so that's how they did it how geeto
 did it in python 1.0 but up next we're going to talk with geet we already talked with geeto
 about how things changed between python 3.6 and python 3.7 the same implementation was like python
 0.1 through python 3.6 roughly the same shape i just covered but things changed in python 3.7
