 >> Hello, and welcome to another programming walkthrough for C programming for everybody.
 This is one of the last walkthroughs for the epilogue code.
 And in this walkthrough, we are going to look at how dictionary,
 the internal data structures in Python for
 dictionaries changed between the first version and the 3.7 version.
 And so we talked previously P1 dict.c about, in effect, Python 0.01 through Python 3.6.
 And then Python 3.7 and later has a new dictionary that maintains insert order.
 But it also saves a lot in terms of efficiency.
 So here is our approximation and
 simplification of the Python 3.7 dictionary.
 And so, let's talk a little bit about the problem that the Python 3.7
 dictionary solved by looking at the Python 0.01 dictionary.
 Now, if you listen to the Ida Van Rossum video that I've got,
 these key value pairs in the real version of the dictionary,
 it stores the pointer to a key, pointer to the value, and the hash value.
 So it doesn't have to recompute the hash.
 Now, I kept it simple and all my stuff was going to be small, so
 I didn't do this optimization to recompute the hash.
 I could have, but I just kind of want to keep the code as small as possible.
 So I just recompute the hash in the few places I need it.
 But this means that in a 64-bit system, this is 3 times 8 or 24 bytes.
 And the problem is, let me delete this line so I don't break my code,
 the load factor.
 We never let the load factor get above 0.7, which means that by definition and
 the larger the structure gets, the larger the wastage is.
 30% of the entries have to be empty in the key value pair array.
 And again, that's 30% of 24 bytes wasted.
 30% of the size of the array times 24 bytes, that's always wasted.
 You cannot not waste it.
 [COUGH] And so what happened is, is that in the Python 3.7 version,
 in effect, items was treated more like a simple linear array
 of pointers to key value pairs.
 So now you've got your key value pair, and Python has key value hash and
 a few other things.
 So this is a larger data structure.
 Dnode is a larger data structure.
 And then we have a separate simple integer array that is the index,
 because items is an array, and index is the offset into that array.
 But that's just one integer.
 And so we're gonna do all the hash indexing and resolution and
 conflict resolution and collision resolution in this index array,
 which itself is a much smaller item.
 And I'm gonna just make it, and I don't know if Python does this.
 I'm just gonna let index be twice as long as items.
 Which means from an indexing perspective, we never get a load factor above 50%.
 And we're only going to extend the array when we run out of space in items.
 And we're gonna store the key value pairs linearly, 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 in items.
 And then we're gonna just realloc it.
 So in many ways, all of a sudden, the kind of reallocing.
 Let me open a new tab here, p1list.c.
 The reallocing code, if we go back to the p1list, extend if necessary,
 you're gonna see that in p1list append and p3list append,
 we're going to see that it looks a lot like the realloc pattern in
 the Python list, because it is an array, okay?
 The actual key value pairs are stored linearly in an array.
 And that's also how you end up with maintaining insert order.
 It wasn't they tried to maintain insert order.
 But at some point, if you're just using a linear list, 0, 1, 2, 3, 4,
 insert order is gonna be maintained.
 And if you delete one, you shift them all up and it just treats.
 So I would guess that ultimately inside of Python itself, after 3.7,
 there might be some overlap in the code between dictionary and list.
 Cuz they pulled out the hashing lookup in this separate data structure,
 which is an array of integers.
 Okay, so then if we look at the get bucket is the same.
 It allows hash function.
 I did it as small as I could, just so it didn't take up a lot of screen space.
 If we look at the constructor, p3dict_new,
 we see we're allocating the actual dictionary object.
 And then we're allocating two key value pairs, two struct D nodes.
 And then we're allocating four, two times the alloc size of integers.
 So our index is four, and our D node array is two.
 And we don't have to initialize the key value pair array, the items array,
 because we know with length which ones are valid and which ones aren't valid.
 But we do have to take this new index and put negative 1 in there.
 We did this a little differently in Python 1 dictionary.
 We used nulls, but right now it's an array of integers and
 the negative 1 is gonna be my marker.
 That's gonna be my marker to say this is an available index slot, okay?
 So that's what the data structures look like.
 Let's go ahead and run the code.
 Now you'll note that this code is in effect exactly the same as the p1dict code
 that we went through before.
 And so we'll run it and it will look stunningly familiar.
 Meaning that we have an empty dictionary.
 We're putting z equals catchphrase, I'm putting z equals w,
 so chi equals b, sally equals c, a equals d, and we're printing it out.
 So now we're printing it out.
 This is like an iterator, so z catchphrase.
 And then zero is the position in the index, not the position in the items.
 It's the position in the index.
 So this is in index position zero.
 And so we see z maps to w, so chi maps to b, and
 they're in index positions zero and one.
 It's kinda hard to hash, because we don't have to rehash
 until it's completely full, and we have two items.
 The alloc is two, so we can put z equals w and chi equals b.
 Remember that index is four when alloc is two.
 So index has four integers, so we still have a load factor of 50%.
 But now what happens, we're gonna put sally equals c in.
 And now we have to extend the items, and we automatically extend the index.
 So we have a 50% load average before the extend, and
 then we have a 50% load average after the extend.
 Well, actually less than 50% load average.
 But the point is, is because I just, by definition,
 had my hash index be double the length, I never get to a load average of 0.5.
 Above 0.5, and again, you can make this more complex and
 let the load average get to 0.7, but I'm keeping it really simple.
 The other thing that you'll notice is in the rehash, again,
 thinking back to the Python one, so you'll notice that the hash position of z,
 just like in the previous one, after it went from two to four,
 went from position zero to position two.
 And I talked about how it's not gonna completely move randomly, but
 it hopped in this case, because whatever the hash value,
 modulo two was zero, and modulo four was two.
 And that's because zero is modulo two.
 So these things kinda go by powers of two.
 But b equals one stayed in the same place, etc., etc., etc.
 But here's the thing, notice the order of the things printing out.
 These zeros and ones, etc., that's the hash position,
 but it's not the position in items.
 So z equals catchphrase in item sub zero.
 Z equals w is in item sub zero.
 Sakai is b, that's in item sub one, hash position.
 So z equals w in this output is in hash position two,
 but items position zero.
 And so you'll notice that insert order is maintained in this, unlike the p1.
 Again, this wasn't to make insert order work.
 It was a side effect of changing the data structures to make items be
 just an indexed array starting at zero.
 And again, pulling the hash computation, sorry.
 Yeah, items is an array that's linear.
 And index is an array that is looked up by a hash.
 Okay, so let's take a look.
 So let's take a look at put.
 And of course, the first thing we see is p3 find, and just underscore find.
 So recall from the previous one that the goal of find is to
 find a bucket position that's free and available, okay?
 And so remember that get bucket is just the hash computation for
 that particular key we're looking for.
 And we have the same kind of circular.
 This will give us a number between zero and eight, like zero through seven.
 If there's eight entries or zero through three,
 if there's four, zero through zero or one, if there's two.
 And then we have to go with the circular look, okay?
 But you'll notice now when I say four offset equals zero,
 offset less than self alloc times two.
 I am now looping through the index array, not the items array.
 And I do the same little trick to do the modulo so
 that it goes like five, six, seven, zero, one, two, three, four.
 So i goes five, six, seven, zero, one, two, three, four,
 which is exactly what you need to do to do collision resolution using linear probing,
 which is the way we do it.
 And it's very simple.
 If we find an empty spot in the index, now the data is not an index,
 the data is still in items, right?
 So if we find an empty spot in index, meaning it's a negative one,
 that's a free one, and that's what we're gonna return.
 Notice that in this one, I'm returning an integer rather than a pointer.
 I probably should go back and
 change all those others to return integers instead of pointers.
 Cuz it, I think, makes code easier, looks a little more complex in some places, but
 easier to understand in other places.
 If it's negative one, we're done.
 If we look at the key and we find in items now,
 this one's a little trickier.
 We're comparing the key to self items, which is the key value pairs, right?
 But it's self index sub i.
 Self index sub i is the position within items of a particular key value pair.
 So we have to look up using self index to find the right spot.
 Cuz self items is like a linear list, it's not really a hash map.
 The only thing that's hashing here is the index.
 And then we go grab the key out of the thing.
 And if we match it, we're like, oh, this is the position.
 Oh, by the way, I found it.
 So in our calling code, we'll check to see if it's empty or not.
 But right now, if it's empty, we turn i.
 And if it matches, we return i.
 Otherwise, we keep incrementing.
 Now the key thing is because the load factor is only 0.5,
 this is always going to succeed.
 That's another nice thing about this.
 It always is going to succeed.
 Because when we increase the size of items,
 we also increase the size of index, so that index is always two times the size
 of items, so we never get a load factor above 0.5.
 Which means this feels, to me, like a lot more reliable code.
 And if we don't find an empty slot, which in the other one,
 that was a trigger for reallocation.
 But in this one, we reallocate differently.
 So returning negative 1, that's just not a good sign.
 Okay, so let's take a look again at find, I mean at the put.
 So this code here, when we do the find, position equals p3 dict find of
 the inserted key, we basically say if the position is not equal to negative 1,
 that means this is a valid entry, which means we're replacing the value.
 And again, that's the scenario where we have z equals catchphrase and
 then we say z equals w, we're just going to replace the value.
 We're not going to change the key.
 The key is already in the right position.
 The key is already hashed properly.
 The index is correct.
 The items is correct.
 And all we need to do is grab the value and get rid of it and
 then alloc the new value and stir copy it in and we're done.
 So we're done.
 So if we find it, that's great, okay?
 So we don't find it, we have to insert it.
 But we know where to insert it right here.
 But now what we do is we simply say if self length is greater than or
 equal to self alloc, that's when we're going to expand it.
 So here we're saying if self length is greater than or equal to self alloc 0.7.
 Now the alloc here is the number of things in the items which we're
 using linearly, which means we can build up 100% before we have to extend it.
 So we're looking to see if the length is greater than or equal to self alloc.
 Here we were looking at is the length greater than or
 equal to self alloc times the load factor 0.7.
 That's only triggered in Python 1 dictionaries.
 But if we look, this again, this append says, now we're in P1 list.
 This is again that duality between Python 1 lists and Python 3.7 dictionaries.
 Because in a sense, the items is just a list, right?
 So if self length, which means now it's full, it's 100% full,
 it's 100% utilized, there are no spaces in items.
 If self length is greater than self alloc, we're going to extend it.
 So that means that this code here, self length, self alloc,
 is really quite simple, right?
 So we just realloc the items and realloc whatever.
 We're going to do twice as big in this case.
 And so that is exactly copied from the list, we just realloc.
 Okay, but now we got a little bit more work to do in Python 3.
 Because the items was easy, we just realloced it.
 We did exactly what lists would do in this situation.
 But now we got to fix the index, okay?
 And so self items at this point is right, okay?
 So self items is right, because realloc did all the work for us.
 We doubled the size of it, but then it copied all that stuff, okay?
 And the other thing we don't have to do here, which we did have to do in Python 1,
 is we didn't have to set all these new items that have been allocated.
 Because in items, because it's like a list, alloc and length is all that matters.
 And we haven't changed length yet, we have changed alloc.
 So the fact there might be garbage in all that new data, it might be zeros,
 it might be garbage is okay.
 Now what we're going to do is rebuild the index, items hasn't moved.
 And so we don't need it, we just free index right now.
 Remember, index is that integer array that's twice alloc, right?
 So now we just allocate another integer array that's twice the size
 of whatever we've got allocated in items, an integer array.
 So self arrow alloc times two times size of int, boom.
 And then we just have a little for loop, for i equals less than or
 equal to self alloc two i plus plus, set it to negative one.
 Cuz what we're doing is we're creating a new completely empty index.
 The key value pairs are just sitting there happy as a clam in items.
 But now we gotta make a new index, okay?
 So we're gonna refill this index, but it's really simple.
 So now we're going not to alloc, for i equals zero, i less than self length.
 Now we're gonna go through the items, and that's length.
 And then we're gonna call the find operation based on the key of each of
 the items, and that's gonna give us a position.
 And it's going to do conflict resolution,
 collision resolution using linear probing.
 And so at that point, all the index at that position is,
 the position is where in this array should it go?
 And that means that if it's in the third position in the hash map, and
 we're looking at the zeroth position in items, i is zero and position is three.
 And so this code, if you compare this code again, it's better memory wise.
 If you compare this code to the code inside, if you compare this
 real code between the Python one code and the Python three code.
 And I don't even do it in KR because it was gonna be so ugly,
 I didn't wanna show it to you, right?
 So it's ugly in Python one, it is pretty in Python two.
 I'm seriously, if you look at this code in underscore put for a while, and
 we're like, why didn't they think of that back in 1989?
 Why did it take them till whatever 2018 or something to see this?
 It's a beautiful data structure, right?
 It is a beautiful data structure, okay.
 So here we are in this code where we have refilled the index.
 And again, self index is changing, right?
 And because that's how the conflict resolution works.
 And positions in the index might be different before and after.
 So, after that, we're done extending.
 We're gonna have to do the actual insert.
 Cuz the reason we extended is we're gonna insert a new thing.
 In this case, if we look at, we're trying to put sally equal c in.
 Then we extend from two through four.
 And now we're done extending, and so we gotta put sally in, right?
 So sally's gonna go in.
 And this is the insert code that we've already looked at, right?
 But we do have to go find it's the position of sally.
 Cuz we found it before in the pre-expanded index slash items.
 And now we're finding it in the post-expanded index slash items.
 But then we just allocate the key and the value, copy them in, and
 then add the key value pair at the end of length.
 Which is not alloc, but
 length is like the next position in that linear array of items.
 So we're new items, we set the new key, the new value, and
 then we set the index to be pointing at this entry in self-items.
 Cuz index is an integer.
 So it's like if we're putting it in, so if we're expanding from two to four and
 we're gonna now use three, position two actually, self-index, whatever.
 The position is computed by hashing and linear collision cleanup.
 And then we set it to length and we add one to the length.
 So if you watch kind of all this stuff, it just, of these four lines of code,
 only one of those lines has to do with hashing.
 And that is the self-index position equals self-length.
 We're recording, it's kinda like recording a cookie crumb in the Hansel-Gradle.
 So we're just remembering in the index where that is.
 So we can jump to the right position in index quickly using hashing,
 rather than doing a linear scan of the key value pairs.
 But literally, if you took this index away, you have just a list.
 And so again, let's look at Python list.
 Yeah, this is simpler cuz I'm not, yeah.
 But all it does is it extends the, extends, this was a list of strings.
 So it's actually a little simpler.
 But all it does is it copies the string and then puts it at the end, and
 then adds one to the length, and it's done.
 And so the Python 3 dictionary does that.
 It's kinda cool.
 So as we put sallyc, it extends it, it recomputes the index.
 And that's why the hash position of z moved, but not the position in items.
 The position in index moved, cuz this sub 2, z maps to w in position 2.
 That's the index position, not the item's position.
 The item's position is just like a linked list.
 Z is in 0, Sakai is in sub 1, and sally is in sub 2.
 And so that's insert order, and everything works pretty well.
 And so for me, as I think about the Python 3 dictionary and
 compare that to a classic Kernigan and
 Ritchie dictionary where the classic Kernigan and
 Ritchie dictionary was so complex on rehashing, that I didn't even write code for it.
 I'm like, let's pretend that's not a problem, okay?
 And now I can tell you in the Python 3 code, I can tell you,
 I can go all the way through the rehashing and
 tell you that it's some of the more beautiful code that I've seen.
 So I hope that you found this valuable.
 Cheers, and I hope to see you online.
 [MUSIC]
