 [MUSIC PLAYING]
 Can you walk us up to the inspirations and the history
 of how perhaps ABC got so good at OO?
 So ABC was actually not object oriented.
 ABC had a fixed set of data types.
 The data types were composable, like you
 could have, say, a list of integers or a list of strings.
 And those would share the operations on lists.
 But there was no concept of class.
 There was no concept of users defining classes.
 There was no concept of subclassing,
 either in the implementation or for the built-in types.
 So ABC had a bunch of really convenient to use primitives.
 They did a lot of work for you, but they weren't really OO.
 That's correct.
 And they insisted that there was only a single numeric type,
 in part so that they could sort of not deal
 with the complicated hierarchy of integers and floats
 and rationals and sort of--
 So then, but when you started Python,
 you had like object orientation very front of mind,
 not just a convenient set of primitives,
 but a convenient set of object-based primitives.
 Where-- did you read that in it?
 Yeah.
 Or did you read that somewhere else?
 I was familiar with C++.
 Yeah.
 And I think that might have been the only object-oriented
 language that I knew at the time.
 At least, I can't think of any--
 well, I own a big book about Simula,
 which is sort of the granddaddy of all object-oriented
 languages, I don't think I ever managed
 to get my hands on a Simula compiler.
 And I have to admit, I also only skimmed the book
 because it was actually sort of--
 Had you written C++ before?
 Yes.
 Like what kind of-- how much have you written C++?
 Enough to invent automatic--
 I forget what they're called.
 The pointers that are like automatically ref counted.
 So yeah, I forget, C++--
 They're a standard--
 --counting on top of C++ so that you would not
 lose your sanity while working in C++?
 No, because I was very familiar with ref counts.
 Because ABC's implementation is written in C,
 and everything uses reference counting.
 And it works out better in ABC because there
 are no cycles possible in the data types.
 Because there are no mutable data types.
 You can't have an object that contains itself or references
 itself directly or indirectly in ABC.
 I don't think that I sort of realized
 all the details of why that is important.
 And I didn't care, because pragmatically, those things
 aren't always as important as they seem to be theoretically.
 But anyway, I was very familiar with reference counting
 in C and how it was used for ABC.
 I think that that's where I learned about it.
 And I didn't hear much about it elsewhere.
 Then at some point when I was teaching myself C++--
 this must have been in the mid '80s--
 one of the things I tried was--
 I mean, my experience with ABC and reference counts
 in the implementation was that it was very error prone.
 We regularly had to sort of deal with bugs in the implementation
 where we either leaked memory or sort of crashed
 because we had freed things early.
 And it was always like, oh, there's
 a missing ink ref or dec ref.
 And of course, the missing dec ref
 is much harder to debug because you leak a byte here
 and you leak a byte there and nobody notices.
 Because people didn't write large applications in ABC.
 So anyway, someone probably put me on the idea of in C++,
 you can override primitive operations to the extent
 that you can build automatic reference counting.
 And I built that for some toy application
 and played with it and realized that it didn't work right.
 The problem was that it was like--
 and I probably didn't know enough C++ at the time,
 or possibly C++ hadn't developed certain subtle mechanisms
 like move operations.
 It was very crude, like overloading assignment.
 That was basically what I did.
 And so I found that where if I had handwritten reference count
 operations, I would sort of know, OK, this object
 is owned here, so we pass it to some function.
 That function doesn't have to increment the reference count
 just because it's using that object because it's not
 going anywhere as long as the color of that function
 has a reference to it.
 On the other hand, the automatic reference counting,
 as I had implemented it using C++,
 would say, oh, we're passing this thing as an argument
 to a function, so increment the reference count.
 Oh, that function returns, decrement the reference count.
 So there was much, much, much more reference counting
 activity and sort of that part I didn't like.
 And so Python still does it manually
 and is written in C, not in C++.
 But somehow, I picked up the idea of vtables,
 or at least arrays of pointers to functions,
 as a handy way to implement objects.
 And actually, initially for the first probably six months,
 Python was not object oriented.
 And so very few people saw that, like a handful of my coworkers
 saw that.
 And the implementation had this notion
 of you can implement an object type
 by putting a bunch of function pointers
 and a bit of other information in a standard structure that
 describes the type.
 I called it a type, not an object.
 So in a way that you were emulating C++ as a way
 of creating perception of object oriented programming
 without truly being an object.
 Yeah.
 Oh, and wait a second.
 There is another step that I just missed.
 So in around '88, I spent a summer as an intern at DexCirc.
 And I talked to the designers and inventors
 of a language named Modula 3.
 And they were putting the last proof reading efforts
 for the Modula 3 report.
 But they had built a Modula 2 and 1/2 compiler.
 They called it Modula 2 Plus.
 And in their documentation, either the draft
 of the Modula 3 manual or the internal Modula 2 Plus manual,
 I learned this concept of how Modula 2 Plus and 3
 do kind of not quite object orientation.
 And I think they meant it as sort of a reaction
 to how it was done in C++.
 They said Modula 3 is not actually
 an object oriented language.
 But the sort of the key part of object oriented use
 where you define a class through a bunch of functions
 and the notation where you say object dot method
 and then the arguments instead of function and then the object
 and then the rest of the arguments.
 They said if you use that notation object dot or thing
 dot dot method paren and then arguments,
 thing had to be something that had a type.
 I think it was a structure type that had a bunch of function
 pointers in it.
 And so the method names were simply
 fields or members of that structure in Modula 3.
 And so to create the equivalent of a class,
 you defined a structure that had a bunch of function pointers.
 They were all typed.
 So you could say this is a function
 that takes one argument of this type and it returns blah, blah.
 And then a bunch of those with names.
 And the trick was if the compiler sort of noticed
 that you were using that and then you were calling it,
 it would say, oh, we're going to insert
 the thing whose method you just used as the very first parameter
 to the function.
 This is where Python's explicit self comes from.
 And so that is all Modula 3's design that I copied.
 And so originally in Python, I didn't have a user level
 notation to even do that.
 The type system was only extensible
 by writing a C extension.
 Oh.
 And so the author of--
 The class keyword, what we think of as a class keyword,
 was not there for a month and a half.
 In the first probably five or six months, it wasn't there.
 And I think we had an intern who knew C++ better
 or who somehow had the right--
 who knows?
 He was younger than me.
 And he said, hey, if you want to give users the ability
 to define their own classes, here
 is a hack how you could do it.
 You add this little bit of syntax,
 and then you map it to this structure
 at the implementation time, and it all works.
 And that's 5.1c.
 And yeah.
 And so everything else was working.
 We had a working interpreter with a REPL, and integers,
 and floats, and strings, and tuples, and lists,
 and dictionaries, and functions, and types
 that were sort of internal things.
 I think even then you could ask for the type of an object.
 Did you, at the time, in these first six months of Python,
 did you feel like you were doing core research
 on what object orientation was going to mean in the future?
 No.
 Or were you just--
 I was just hacking together an implementation of a language
 that I didn't know where it was going.
 I obviously spent enough time on it
 that I was hoping it would go somewhere.
 But--
 You didn't think of yourself as like a--
 that you were going to someday write
 a paper about how object orientation should be done.
 You weren't thinking like a researcher would think.
 Definitely not that.
 You were just solving problems.
 I was not a researcher.
 I was a programmer.
 I do not have a PhD.
 I was employed by CWI as a programmer.
 Do you now even think maybe that you
 made a profound contribution?
 You're the first person to tell me that.
 And I'm not sure that I totally believe it.
 I would say that the Modula 3 inventors sort of
 made that contribution because they were much more sort
 of researchy types, theory types.
 They thought long and deep about all the sort
 of theoretical and eventual repercussions
 of designs like that.
 And I was happy to implement something even if there were
 edge cases where it would just not do the right thing at all,
 like until we finally, after about a decade or so,
 added a cyclic garbage collector to the language.
 Python would leak memory irretrievably
 in many situations where you had created a cycle
 and then lost the last pointer into the cycle from outside it.
 And it took a very long time before our users convinced us
 that there were some edge cases where that was actually
 a real problem and there was no good existing solution.
 [MUSIC PLAYING]
 (dramatic music)
