 Hello and welcome to the last lecture in this course. We're going to talk about TreeMaps and
 HashMaps. Up till now we've built a map abstraction, we've looked at how iterators work, we've created a
 linked list implementation of the hash abstraction, and now we're going to go and build a hash
 version and a tree version of that same thing. If you recall some lectures ago I read a Robert Frost
 poem, you know, miles to go before I sleep. Well, that's where we're at now. We're coming to the end
 of this miles to go, although as you'll see the end is really just the beginning of the next phase.
 And with a little foreshadowing, if you have been with me for a very long time, all the way
 since Python for Everybody, which for me was recorded a number of years ago already,
 this is the first complete piece of code that I showed you, and that was the code to count the
 number of words in a file by splitting them, then creating a dictionary, and then counting them.
 Now we're going to finish this lecture by implementing this in C, but I'm getting ahead
 of myself. So the idea here is we're exploring, you know, different key value implementation
 alternatives. We built an unordered Java-based hash map, which is like a Python 2 dictionary.
 If you recall, Python 2 had unordered hash maps, which meant you sort of ended up with your stuff
 coming out in a random order. It was the same order, but every time you inserted something,
 the order might change. Now Python 3, they tend to, later versions of Python 3, they tend to be
 ordered, which are more like the list map that we did. We're going to have a map that is sorted,
 that's more like Java's tree map with an iterator, and it is sort of chapter 6.5 or section 6.5 of
 the book, and it is a combination of a tree map and a linked list map, but Java doesn't have such
 thing, which really kind of surprises me. They got a tree map and they got a hash map, but they don't
 have a linked tree map or a linked map. So here we go. Now these, the two abstractions, I mean,
 two implementations we're going to build, kind of, you see them in Python, you see them in C++,
 and you pretty much see them in Java as well, but we're going to do our own thing.
 So I would say to you when you're writing this code, I don't want you to think that when I wrote
 this code that I gave you as samples or when I wrote these slides, that it was easy for me.
 The concept of trees and hashes are pretty straightforward, but then you got to solve
 the little problems of how to take the previous and hook it to the current and hook the next to the
 current next to the next from the preview. And so you've got to draw pictures, and this is actual
 picture that I drew. I really wrote all this code from scratch. I mean, I didn't come up with the
 idea of a tree from scratch, but I wrote this code from scratch. And you can see that the,
 like when I was building the tree map, my goal was to find the right place in the tree to insert
 the next item. And so you see I've got this 1, 3, 5, 7, 9, 11, 13. So I kind of constructed this tree
 that was right, it was in order. And then I was trying to figure out where I might put 4 and where
 I might put 8 and where I might put 14. And then I kind of had this notion when I was writing the
 picture that I, you'll see I had the words lowest, node, greater than, and then I cross them all out
 because that wasn't enough. And you'll see when we get there that I have the lowest node greater
 than and the greatest node less than. And I've got to get both of those things. And so as we
 work our way down the tree, we've got to keep track of this. I'm getting way ahead of myself.
 Like many data structure programming tasks, they, you can draw the picture and it makes a lot of
 sense. You see the hash map, which is the first one we're going to do. That's really just nothing
 more than a bunch of linked lists with a hash function picking the head. Instead of one head,
 it has in this case four heads. So that one turns out to be easy and that's the first one that we're
 going to do. But when I wrote this, I mean, I knew what I was doing. I knew what a tree was. I knew
 what a hash was. That's the easy part. The hard part's writing the code. Now taking the code from
 someone else, like if you're taking it from Python or C++ or Java, that's easy. Thank heaven. They
 wrote it and they tested it. And we have a nice tested working implementations. So you shouldn't
 have to write this stuff in most languages. And so we're just understanding how to write it. But
 if you do it right, you're going to make mistakes and you're going to, you're going to be 80% right.
 But then it's going to be real hard to debug this stuff. So part of what you need to figure,
 you need to accept the fact that you will, you're not likely to write it perfect the first time
 and debugging is difficult. You're going to print out a bunch of like percent P's and hex
 values and stuff. And you're going to just go through it slowly. Like what did I do wrong?
 Because the main programs for the programming assignments that I give you are really kind of
 like unit tests. They're sort of pushing your implementation to see if it's capable of handling
 all of the common situations. And so don't, don't stress if it doesn't work right away.
 My implementations didn't work right away. They failed. You can, you know, if you can go to some
 website and get the solution. I mean, if you're going to do that, just go to Python and make a
 dictionary. If that's your goal, your goal is to struggle with doing something that you understand.
 You know how to do it. You know what a tree is. You kind of know that you got prebs and necks and
 lefts and rights, but you still got to write the code and making one or two mistakes and then fixing
 those one or two mistakes is essential to understanding. So with that up next, we're
 going to talk about the HashMap.
