 So up to now, we've done all the easy stuff.
 So it's time to do the linked TreeMaP.
 Which really is kind of a modern, flexible key value store.
 This is a nice key value store that you
 would want to use if you were a software developer.
 Our linked TreeMaP is ordered, like Python order dictionaries.
 It stays sorted, meaning that not only does it stay in order,
 it stays in sorted order.
 We insert things, and they go in an order, like a Java TreeMaP.
 You can be iterated, like a C++ map or an ordered dictionary,
 but not a Java TreeMaP.
 This just boggles my mind why you can't--
 well, we'll talk about actually why they didn't do it.
 But it's not that hard.
 And we're going to have fast lookups.
 So the problem with a list map is it's
 got a lot of nice features.
 And we can make a sorted list map,
 and we're going to in this section.
 But the problem with a list map is lookup is slow.
 And so we're going to actually pretty much use the tree part
 to do fast lookup.
 And you can see this in 6.5.2 of the textbook.
 So we are going to do something that's
 pretty common in data structures.
 And that is we're going to maintain two--
 whatever the entries, and they're
 going to maintain simultaneously a sorted linked
 list through the entries and a binary tree.
 And so we're going to look at them separately,
 and then we're ultimately going to find them together.
 We're going to put them together.
 So let's talk about what a tree is.
 A tree is a structure that the TreeMaP entry you see
 has a left and a right.
 So the things to the left are things
 where the key is lower than the current, right?
 So H equals 42.
 The question is, where would A go?
 Well, A goes to the left.
 Where would T go?
 Well, T goes to the right.
 So the idea of the tree is that whatever entry you're in,
 there's a key in the entry.
 And then you can either go left or right
 based on the comparison of the key.
 And instead of having a head and a tail, there is just a root.
 So the root is the top entry of this tree.
 And then there's a series of left and right choices
 that you make.
 And each entry has a left and a right.
 And the TreeMaP entry has a key value pair.
 And we're going to keep key and value as public,
 because it's just an entry.
 But now there is no next, right?
 This is why we are using abstraction,
 because we're not even going to give them a next.
 We're going to have a left and a right, OK?
 And we're not going to show that.
 We're not going to let people see that.
 We're just going to give them a set of methods
 to mess with our TreeMaP.
 And we're going to deal with all this stuff.
 And we need a left and a right to do it.
 So just taking a look at how it works
 is let's just say we're going to--
 in this current tree that I've sort of built,
 they're not always balanced.
 I happen to balance it just because it looks better
 on PowerPoint slides.
 But let's just say we're going to insert in this tree
 g equals 25, so it's got a key of g and a value of 25.
 So what you do is you start at the root, and you compare it.
 And you say, oh, g is less than h.
 So we're going to go down the left-hand side.
 So you can think of it as you're walking down
 the left-hand side.
 Then you are encountering d equals 8.
 And then you're like, OK, g is greater than d.
 So we've got to take the-- it's like driving a car.
 Turn right at intersection d.
 And so we do.
 And we're working our way down.
 And now we have-- we're looking at intersection f.
 And we've really got to go left or right.
 And so f, g.
 g is greater than f.
 And so we're going to go to the right, not the left.
 So we do.
 And so that basically is the path that we took.
 And so to insert g into the tree,
 we find the greatest value less than, which is f.
 And you're kind of inserting it, if you think about it,
 between f and h.
 So the next higher one in the tree is h.
 And the next lower one in the tree is f.
 And that was the trip we did.
 I like to think of this sort of trickling down the tree
 and making these decisions as almost like a pachinko machine,
 where you hit the balls.
 They go ding, ding, ding, ding, ding, ding.
 It's not random, of course.
 It's very precise.
 But it is kind of like you stop at the top
 and you make a bunch of binary left, right decisions.
 And eventually you find yourself somewhere at the bottom.
 And so if we kind of look at the tree map put,
 and we are going to start at the root,
 and then we're going to do a comparison,
 and if we find it, the comparison is going to be 0.
 We update the value.
 And if we don't find it and it's less than, we're going to go left.
 And if it's greater than, we're going to go right.
 And so this is basically the idea.
 This while loop will trickle down the tree going left
 and going right.
 And it will either find the value if there's a match.
 Like if we're looking for f, we'd have found it,
 and we'd have stopped, and we would have returned.
 If we're looking for g, we won't find it,
 but we will find where we're supposed to insert it.
 So the last thing that we talk to,
 which g will find its way down to the right of f,
 we will find where to put it.
 So as long as the tree is correctly maintained,
 you will either find a match or you will find the right place
 to insert it.
 And the tree will-- it's not guaranteed to be balanced.
 There's further algorithms that can make the tree balanced.
 But the key thing is that the order will be right.
 So by inserting, following these rules,
 following this algorithm, the order will be right,
 and you will always find the right place to put it.
 Or you will find a matching place.
 And think about how dictionaries work, right?
 You say x sub hello equals something.
 Well, there's either going to be a hello key in there or not.
 If there's not, we're going to put it in.
 If there is, we're going to update it.
 And that's what this code does.
 We're going to create a new tree map.
 We're going to put h equals 22, and then we're
 going to do h equals 42, which replaces h, right?
 Then we're going to do d equals 8.
 Then we do b equals 1, 2, 3.
 And then we're going to do f equals 6.
 And it turns out I'm kind of doing this in order
 so it doesn't get too long on the page.
 And then I'm going to do a dump.
 And remember how important a debug is.
 When I first wrote this code, you can darn well bet you
 that I had map dump.
 It was map put, map dump, map put, map dump,
 map put, map dump, so I could see what it does.
 And so the dump, if you look at the dump,
 then we put in k and m and j, and then we dump it again.
 And so what I've done is, if you look at the map output,
 you see that the map output has these h equals 42.
 And then it's kind of trying to give you
 some sense of the tree-ness of it,
 meaning that the b equals 123, f equals 6, and d equals 8.
 The number of vertical bars tell you
 how deep in the tree you are.
 And so you can see that the immediate child nodes of h
 in the second dump are d and k.
 And the child nodes of k are j and m.
 So you can draw this all up.
 And so the idea of my dump code is
 I'm trying to sort of draw you a tree.
 So here is the dump code.
 Now this is very, very different.
 And literally, this is the first time-- well,
 I talked about recursions and functions.
 I talked about stack frames and stuff like that.
 But if you go all the way back to Python for everybody,
 I delay talking about recursion until there's
 a real value for it.
 And it turns out, this is a beautiful use of recursion.
 And if you didn't write this recursively,
 you'd probably have to write your own stack.
 And that would be like a bummer, because we're
 going to recursively go down the tree,
 and we're going to keep track of the depth.
 And the idea of the depth is it tells me
 how many vertical bars to print.
 So we come in, and we're pointed at a particular place
 in the tree, maybe the root, maybe the top one.
 And depth is going to be 0.
 And so if cur is null, we're done.
 A key thing to recursion is you've
 got to have a way to get out.
 So if we get to the end of some tree, subtree,
 and we get to a null, we go left or right,
 and that it's a null, don't print anything out.
 Just you're done.
 You've gone one beyond the leaf of the tree.
 And cur is null, so just return.
 Then what we do is we have a for loop,
 depending on depth, that prints vertical bar space.
 That spaces it over.
 And we're going to go down the left tree,
 and then we're going to come back,
 and we're going down the right tree.
 And this is what's called a depth-first search
 for those computer science nerds.
 And so we're going to go down the left.
 And you'll notice that when we go down the left,
 if the left is not equal to null,
 we are going to dump the tree on the left
 with depth equals depth plus 1.
 And so if we start with a depth of 0,
 that's going to become 1.
 And then if we recursively go down further,
 then it's going to be 2.
 And then when that recursion comes back,
 if cur right is not equal to null,
 we're going to dump the tree on the right.
 So what you see is dump the tree on the left recursively,
 which means go all the way down the left,
 then come back up, then dump the right node,
 then come back up, go up again, and dump the right node.
 And so you see this like how the order-- this
 is a depth-first search of H. We're going down past D.
 Then we're going even further past B.
 And then we're coming up from B, and we're going back down
 from D to F. We're coming up from F. Then we come up from D.
 Then we go across H. And then we go down to K.
 Then we go to the left of K, which is J. We go back up.
 And then we go to the right of K, which is M.
 And then we go back up, go back up, and we're done.
 So the calling sequence to this is tree map, dump tree,
 self-root with a depth of 0.
 I will say this.
 When I wrote this code the first time,
 I had printfs all over the place.
 Now I pretty much know how to do a depth-first search of a tree.
 But still, in a debugging, sometimes you
 make your tree incorrectly.
 And your debugging is like, huh?
 That doesn't look like what I thought it was going to be.
 And so don't be ashamed if you have
 to put print statements in all over the place.
 First, get your dump working.
 Just make sure your dump works, because then you
 can debug everything else with the dump.
 And the get's pretty simple.
 And we've got the default. We've got the key.
 And we've got the tree.
 So we're going to start a while loop, where
 we're going to go down left, right, left, right, left, right.
 So we're going to start at the root.
 We're going to compare the key to the key we're searching
 for, the current key.
 If they're the same, then return the value.
 We could do this recursively, but you
 don't do recursion if you don't need to.
 If the key we're looking for is less than the key we found,
 we're going to go down the left.
 And if the current key-- otherwise, we're
 going to go down the right.
 And so you can see this thing is just going to pachinko its way
 down, ding, ding, ding, ding, ding, to the right spot.
 And if it gets to null, then we return the default.
 Remember, this is like a dictionary.
 If the key's not there on a get, we return the default.
 You can see why Guido van Rossum, in Christmas 1987,
 created a function called get, which looked for a key
 and took a default value.
 Because this code is what you write,
 what I'm going to return null and then I have an if statement.
 Heck no.
 Just pass in a default. If you get to the bottom of the tree
 and you haven't found it, return the default.
 If I want it to be null, I can make the default null, right?
 Away we go.
 So this is beautiful.
 This is beautiful.
 So from that beauty, both the dump are beautiful
 and the get is beautiful.
 Iterator is a pain.
 You just can't easily build an iterator for a pure tree.
 If you have nothing more than that tree.
 So a list map can support an ordered iterator.
 We saw before a hash map can support an unordered iterator.
 But a tree map cannot support an iterator
 without building some kind of a stack.
 And the problem is that the concept of current
 is just so complex.
 When we're doing recursion, the concept of current
 is just so implicit.
 It's actually in the call stack, the notion of current.
 Because there's really, when you're doing the dump,
 you have a call stack of currents.
 And then when you go back up the call stack,
 you're getting a different current.
 So you're switching back.
 And so you either have to make your own stack of currents.
 You could build an iterator for a tree,
 but you have to build a stack.
 So a lot of folks sort of don't want to do that.
 We could build a stack, but we're not going to.
 So what we're going to do is we're
 going to do a technique for our iterator
 that is a common technique.
 When you have a data structure that almost does what you want,
 and then you have another data structure that
 does what you want, you combine them.
 So if you look at this tree, there's
 a lot of nice things for searching, for replacing,
 for inserting.
 And it does all that very fast, because it's actually
 log n, because the height of the tree
 is log base 2 of the width of the tree,
 the number of items in the tree.
 So it's log base 2-ish.
 So it's super fast.
 All my trees are small.
 But if these trees get big, they're super fast.
 It goes down, the pachinko sits way down
 to the bottom really fast.
 But I can't easily build an iterator.
 So what I'm going to do is I'm going
 to add to this a linked list.
 But I'm going to have the linked list simultaneously
 working with the tree.
 So each of these items is going to have
 a next and a pre and a left and a right.
 And we're going to almost write the code mentally independently
 for the tree code and the linked list code.
 So we're ultimately going to combine these things together.
 There's not a separate linked list and a separate tree.
 It looks like this in a linked tree map.
 So think of each one of these things having a next
 and a pre and a left and a right.
 And we maintain them in such a way when we're doing inserts
 that everything works perfectly.
 So we're going to simultaneously maintain
 with the same entries a tree and a list.
 But we're only going to use the list to build the iterator.
 And we're going to make this a sorted list,
 because these things are in order.
 The tree is helping us quickly find the place to put it.
 But also, we're to put it in order.
 So let's take advantage of that.
 So this is a sorted, ordered dictionary in Python lingo.
 So just remember that these entries, these list tree map
 entries, are simultaneously participating in a tree
 and at the same time in another layer,
 as it were, participating in a linked list.
 The tree map, which is the tree map structure,
 has a head and a root.
 Because at the same time, tree map
 is both a tree and a linked list.
 And the map entry is going to have a next and a left
 and a right.
 And again, you just almost keep these things
 separate in your mind.
 When we're doing tree things, we're
 going to use left and right and root.
 And when we're doing list things,
 we're going to use head and next.
 And these are things now by now that should
 be sort of familiar to you.
 So this is the structure that we're
 going to build and maintain.
 And up next, we're going to build the put code,
 or this combined two-layer data structure that
 has a tree and a sorted linked list all at the same time.
 [MUSIC PLAYING]
