 So this is an entire lecture on the put method of our TreeMaP and the essence of this is we're
 going to be simultaneously updating two data structures at the same time. I guess that's the
 definition of simultaneously. So just before we start, this is not easy. I think it's pretty
 much impossible to do exactly what I'm asking you to do, just use a bunch of Google searches or
 asking your AI bot, maybe, maybe you can. You need to really understand what you're doing and this is
 where a picture is so valuable. Once you understand it, the code should look very clean and very simple
 to you. My put code as I was writing it was like broken and like I tried to fix it and then it was
 broken again and I threw it away and I wrote it again and I drew a new picture and I wrote it and
 it was broken and I threw it away again and then like poof it was perfect. So as you're writing data
 structure code, the notion of like it's broken, just accept that it's broken. It's going to be broken.
 You're going to throw it away. That's the point because you know that this algorithm is eventually
 going to work. The algorithm is not the problem, it's your implementation that's the problem.
 Okay, so we take a quick look at the performance of foot and I've mentioned this. The binary search
 is log n while a sorted list search is order n, meaning that if you have a search list of 500,000
 or a million, it takes on average 500,000 lookups to find it, whereas a million entry tree search,
 you take the log two of a million and you get about 20. So the key thing is we're going to
 use the tree anytime we're searching and we're going to only use the list when we're iterating,
 but we're going to while we're doing put, we've got to maintain both the tree and the list. Okay,
 so we are going to have to be real careful to keep in our mind and this is where I drew
 all those pictures. We've got to be able to insert into an empty list, which is easy because root is
 null and you just put the thing in. Then you got to find a right gap, a gap to the to the right is
 something and then find a left gap and then insert at the beginning after you go down a bunch of
 lefts and go down a bunch of rights and then replacing is the easy part. As we've seen in put,
 you just say if it's equal, change the value. Okay, so let's just take a look at our data
 structures and then we talked about these before. We have simultaneously in the entry, we have a left
 and a right and we have a next because we are simultaneously maintaining a sorted linked list
 and a sorted tree. The tree map has a head and it has a root and that's pretty much it.
 So in our in our constructor, we set the head to null, we set the root to null. We're empty,
 we don't have anything in the tree, we don't have anything in the linked list. So the empty list
 is easy, right? And so we have to scan to see if it's in the list, right? And you know if
 you know first we can just say hey if self head is null and be the same as saying if self root is
 null, well we just point head and root to the new item. Okay, because we're inserting h equals 22.
 I'm going to insert these in order so the list so I don't run out of space on my PowerPoint slides.
 And so when we're done with this, root is going to point to h equals 22, the left is going to point
 to null, the right is going to point to null, the next is going to point to null, and head is going
 to point to the item. So we have a valid linked list and we have a valid tree at the same time.
 Okay, so again this is not the whole put code, this is just the first part where we there's
 some dot dot dots in there where you're putting all the data and putting the key in and setting
 next to null and left to null etc. So that's that's in there. But the first one is pretty
 easy from the head and the root. Okay, so we we keep doing that for a while we let's just take our
 we put some things in there and we've got our our linked list going correctly you can just verify
 that you run through they're all in order you can take your your left and your rights and all the
 things that are less than h or to the left of h and all the things that are at the right of h are
 greater than h away we go. So we're going to write some code and what we're really going to look for
 and this is the tricky part is to find the item or the gap where the item belongs. Now the problem
 is is we're going to have to link these things back up when we are just doing a tree it was easier
 because you would either find the item or find the place to link it. Okay, so trees are easier
 to easy to maintain. The linked list is harder to maintain because you've got to keep track of the
 item that is the largest item less and the smallest item greater and that's what I call the gap.
 So this left and this right are to as we're walking down the list we're going to keep track
 of the greatest the smallest greater item and the the largest less item. Okay, and that's what this
 left so we got curr we got left and we've got right and you can think of left and right as like
 breadcrumbs like we're going to throw breadcrumbs when we turn we're going to turn to the left we're
 going to remember the right when we turn to the right we're going to remember the left and you'll
 see it in action. So here we go here we go so we got this tree g equals 29 we're going to insert it
 so then what we do is we compare it to h equals 42 and then we say oh that's a turn to the left
 so now we know at least at this point the greatest value the smallest greatest value is h and so we
 point right at h as we are moving down the tree and you see that you do the stir comp you see what
 it says if comp is less than zero we're going to turn left and then right is going to point at
 curr where we were and now the next time when we're going to turn right which is what we're
 going to do next it's going to remember where left so we're now comparing g to d and g is greater than
 d so now we're going to turn right but now we're going to update left so d at this point in our
 search d is the largest number less than or the largest key less than g and h is the smallest key
 greater than g so you see how left and right are like breadcrumbs as we're sort of pachinkoing our
 way down this tree so then we compare g to f and g is greater than f and so we're going to take a
 right turn and whenever we take a right turn we update left so now we have actually found the
 place that g belongs and if you look left and right are perfect for the linked list because now we know
 that that left next is going to point to g and g next is going to point to h so so left next won't
 point at h anymore it's going to point at g and g new next is going to point at h okay so when we
 do this because we've got left and we've got right we just link them in and then we insert it into the
 tree and away we go and so now you look what we have done is we have now left and right were just
 temporary variables that we had during this tree map put code but if you look at this and look at
 carefully we have a correctly formed linked list that's sorted in order and we have a correctly
 formed tree and we use the tree to get to f fast and we use left and right so that once we got to
 the right place which was to the right of f we could just hook it into that linked list with
 no additional cost okay see how pretty it is so now let's take a look at some other of these things
 so let's take a look at inserting j well j is going to go right when it sees h because it's greater
 than it's going to go left when it sees k because it's less than i mean i i'm inserting i not j
 it's going to go left when it sees k and it's going to go left when it sees j and when it's
 done you got left is h and right the right value and the the i shouldn't even name these left i
 should call them the smallest wait a second the largest value less than and the smallest value
 greater than that would probably be a more mnemonic name is largest value less than and smallest value
 greater than instead of left and right i'm thinking of it as the thing it's like a bracket you got a
 gap and what's your immediate left and what's your immediate right and so now we know exactly
 where this belongs and we know how to update both the link list and the tree so update the link list
 using left and right and then update the tree um using curr right and so away we go and we've got
 ourselves in that gap and so we can insert to the left we can insert to the right now remember
 remember remember that if we were if if our key was j we'd have found it and then all we had done
 is updated the value so remember i and my brain does this a lot when i'm looking at this code
 i'm like but will i find it and will i find the right one what if it's already there well already
 there's the easy part okay so there we go so let's take a look at inserting a equals 17 and how this
 works remember the use cases got to do the beginning the end left gap right gap empty list
 and then pretty much we'll have it so a equals 17 that's going to end up all the way down so we
 are going to compare it and we're going to we're going to turn left to the left to the left i think
 there's a song and a dance about that um and so we remain remember right which is the smallest
 number greater than and it's not going to be right is not going to stay h equals 42 because we're going
 to compare a and d and then we're going to go left again and now right is going to follow us
 and then we're going to compare a and b and we're going to go left again and right is going to follow
 us now the interesting thing is left is now null we have found the place we're going to insert to
 the left of b but we're also going to insert through the head because we know that left is
 null which means that we just found the lowest thing in the current something lower than anything
 in the linked list so then we just hook the hook a in before b right after head and then we hook it
 in to the the left of the b going with a larger than anything else that's in there we're going to
 end up with this at the end of the linked list we're going to compare x to h and going to go right
 and remember left the largest value less than for now we're going to look at k we're going to go left
 again and left is going to be updated to be k the largest value less than then we're going to compare
 x to m and x is still greater than m so we're going to go right again and left is going to be
 m equals 67 and you'll note that the thing we detect here is right equals zero which means
 we have no value greater than x in this list so we just say x next the x current the current thing
 is next is null and the current next is you know points to the x entry and then we hook it in on
 the right side of the m equals 67 and then we are done so if we're going to do a replacement
 remember i told you this was the easy one so and again in my mind when i was writing this code i'm
 like but what if it's already there calm down that's the easy one okay so we're comparing f to h
 well it's to the left we're going to keep track of right but we're not going to use them because
 we're going to find it and then we have a match and then we just see it you go like oh fine f is
 16 we're done life is simple if they're equal we found it you know we don't have to keep looking
 we found it we just change it and again think of how fast now how fast this works when it's the
 keys already there it's like nothing to allocate no links to make you just change the value
 and you're done so it's important to test all of these cases and i just went through every
 single one of the cases and showed you what they're supposed to look like i will tell you
 that you will make mistakes i will tell you that asking google for help as long as you read what
 they say will inform you but i doubt that google is going to just give you the whole code of something
 that is as intricate as this i would say a simultaneous sorted linked list and a tree at
 the same time maybe it can do that because that's what you're really doing so up next
 we are going to go back to the beginning and go back to python for everybody to wrap things up
