 Hello, and welcome to our lecture on Kernigan and Ritchie Chapter 5, putting some context around it.
 Chapter 5 is Functions and Program Structure.
 So, the first thing I want to call your attention to is Section 5.1.
 I actually think that Section 5.1 is the most poignant and beautiful section in the book.
 Everything you've learned up till now, everything I've talked about, size of data, et cetera,
 has led to the point where you can read 5.1 and understand every word of it.
 You should enjoy reading it.
 I think of it as like a love letter from the creators of C to future computer scientists.
 So 5.1's important.
 We'll talk a little bit about pointer arithmetic.
 5.6, we'll look at sort of the duality between pointers and integers, then we'll hit call
 by reference and call by value that are enabled in C by pointers, and then look at the big
 as security hole that C has caused over the past 40 plus years, buffer overflow.
 Now, the chapter gets a little dense in some of the sections, and so I'll just have you
 skim some of those sections.
 This is the essential example of pointers.
 We have two variables, int, x, and y.
 We have a variable px, which is of type pointer.
 It points to an integer.
 That's what int star means.
 We store 42 in x, and we store the address of x into px using the ampersand operator,
 and then we use the address of x, which is in px, and then we use a lookup operator or
 a dereference operator, star px, that says go to the memory location, point to 2 by px,
 and load me an integer and put that into y.
 And so we can see when we print out x is 42 and y is 42 and px is a long hexadecimal number
 that is some memory location inside the actual computer, and so ampersand and asterisk and
 int star, the star is a sort of a modifier for a type, are the important things.
 One of the things that you've probably never seen in Python is the id function.
 We've used functions like type and der, and there are ways for us to inquire about variables
 and constants.
 Id is a way to ask for the id of something.
 Now in CPython, and just to be clear, there are multiple versions of Python.
 CPython is the classic one.
 It's the implementation of Python that happens to be written in C. There are other implementations
 of Python.
 And so what I'm telling you with this id function is something that will work for the moment
 in CPython, but not necessarily every other one.
 If you print it out and you say what is x and what is the id of x, it's kind of like
 the address.
 And if you look at the documentation, it says don't think this is the address, right?
 It says the Python id function is not intended to be dereferenceable, meaning we're not supposed
 to look up memory from that.
 The fact that it's based on the memory address is a CPython implementation detail that other
 Python implementations do not follow.
 Now if you download the source code, kr0501.py, I actually have a completely unauthorized
 implementation of a lookup, a dereference.
 And it has to know the type of the thing that it's dereferencing, y equals deref of px,
 and it can then give me back that integer pointed to by the address.
 But this is not guaranteed to work.
 It's not supposed to be how it works.
 It just is, there is kind, things have addresses, and in CPython, at least for this particular
 version of Python that I'm using, you can use them.
 Pointers gives us the ability to do call by reference.
 And so if you've done Python, you see that we had a slide in an early version of my Python
 class that said sorry, Python doesn't do call by reference, it only does call by value.
 And that means that within a function, you change the parameters and nothing happens.
 But some languages do have call by reference, which means the parameters that come into
 a function are somehow handles that allow us to actually change the values in the main
 program or where we've been calling from.
 So the language Pascal and C and C++, PHP and C# have this notion, a formal notion of
 call by reference.
 And languages that don't have it are like Python and Java and JavaScript.
 Now there is a notion, the fact that I said this is for simple types like integers, objects
 are passed in, but then if you call methods and objects, you can actually change the data
 that the object has.
 But it's not like you're changing the object, you're changing the object's data.
 So let's take a look at a bit of code.
 Now the first example is actually Pascal.
 Now Pascal is a programming language that was written by Nicholas Wirth in Switzerland
 in 1970.
 And it had a call by reference.
 And it had this notion of var.
 And so you're creating a function named func, takes two parameters.
 One is a call by value, which is a, and then the other one is call by reference, which
 is b.
 And we set a and b to two new numbers.
 And then in the main program, we set x equals 42, y equals 43.
 And then we call the function and you'll notice there's no extra syntax in the function.
 And then we come back and you will see that the y variable is changed and the x variable
 is not.
 And then the c version of this, we have x equals 42, y equals 43.
 And then when we call func, we say we're going to pass in x and then ampersand y, which is
 the address of y.
 And if you go back to the very first example in section 5.1, we're passing in a number,
 which we're actually passing in by value.
 But the value is the address.
 And then inside the function, we take a and then a pointer to b, pb.
 And we say that a is just an integer and pb is an address of an integer by adding the
 little asterisk there.
 So the address where it's at has been passed by value.
 But using that value, we can dereference it and get to the thing.
 So we say a equals 1 and then we say star pb equals 2.
 That's a store 2 as an integer into the location pointed to by pb.
 And then when you come back, the second parameter will have been changed, y will have been changed,
 and x will not be changed.
 And if we take a look at a few other languages, so here we have the c code again.
 Python 1989 doesn't have the notion of pass by reference.
 And so one of the things that I think is an excellent compromise that is the case in Python
 is the notion of returning a tuple, not just a single value, but a tuple return.
 And so that way we could, if we really wanted to get back a value, more than one value,
 we could return a tuple and then in the main program, we assign the tuple.
 So if we really wanted x and y to change from inside the function, we could do so by just
 explicitly saying function is going to return two values and we're going to change them
 both.
 So if we look at php, which is 1994, we see a very elegant, I think, whenever you look
 at php, you got to realize the dollar sign is just part of the variable name.
 That's just the first character of all variables in php.
 So what we do inside a function is we say ampersand dollar b, which is the second parameter
 is b, dollar b, and we're expecting to change it.
 And you'll note that we don't change the syntax inside the function, dollar b equals 2, dollar
 a equals 1, the syntax doesn't change.
 And when we make the call, func dollar x comma dollar y, we don't change that either, and
 yet call by reference works.
 So if you look at all these examples, other than the weird dollar sign convention, I would
 say that the simplest and most elegant is probably the php implementation, right?
 Because we don't have to do anything inside the function except I'm planning on changing
 this.
 Now, C#, which is much later, 2000, has this notion of ref, which is somewhat a throwback
 to Pascal, but also it's the ampersand thing.
 But the one thing I like about it is inside the call to func, you have to kind of agree
 the calling code by saying ref x is in a sense agreeing that it is aware that x is likely
 to be changed by that function.
 And so that's call by reference.
 Now, we're in a C class, and so ampersand and asterisk are how we do it.
 So again, it's really quite straightforward inside a C code, as long as you are very good
 at understanding what the asterisk and ampersand do in C.
 Another important thing that's easily understood with a very simple bit of code is pointer
 arithmetic.
 The key to pointer arithmetic is that a pointer to an integer is different than a pointer
 to a character.
 Now, both these pointers are the same size because they are an address, and addresses
 are all the same size.
 But if you add one to a character pointer, that actually adds one to the address.
 And if you add one to an integer pointer, then it adds four, and that's because each
 integer takes four characters.
 And so when you're doing increments and subtracts, et cetera, when they're pointers, it increments
 based on the type of the thing that's pointed to.
 So a pointer is not just a pointer, it's a pointer to a thing with a type.
 And when you're incrementing and decrementing, the type that's being pointed to is more important
 than the fact that it's a pointer.
 It goes up and goes down, but it doesn't always just go up and down by one.
 Pointers are not integers.
 So if you go back to chapter two, there was, from the book, a table of the sizes of things.
 And so if you look in the PDP 11 integers, or 16 bits, in the Honeywell 6000, there are
 36 bits.
 In IBM 370, there are 32 bits.
 In Interdata 832, there's 32 bits.
 Now, I've added a line to this that tells the number of bits and addresses in these
 systems.
 And you can see, if you compare the int numbers to the address numbers, that in all the cases
 except the PDP 11, the integer is larger than the address, which means that there is extra
 space in the address, and we can almost treat addresses as unsigned integers.
 Now, the PDP 11 is a little weird in that that 16 to 32 is a range of delivered computers
 over the years, and not all computers had full memory, and not all applications used
 the entire memory of the entire computer.
 So most of the time, you can conveniently put an address into an integer, and then get
 that address back out, and not have truncated that address or messed it up.
 So treating pointers as integers almost works, and the longer going history it was, the more
 likely it did work.
 Addresses are generally positive numbers that often start from zero.
 Sometimes heap numbers come down, and sometimes stack numbers go up, or whatever.
 But most computers did not come with a maximum memory installed.
 And if you're a multi-user computer, you didn't give all the system's memory to every application,
 and we tended to use very little memory in applications, we were very careful about it.
 So we just never ran into the problem of our memory addresses not fitting into integers.
 So in the early 70s, applications could get away with having a function that returned
 an address, return it as an integer, and then copy it into a pointer without conversion.
 And so, by like the early 80s, the notion of a void pointer gave us a way to have a
 generic address, that is, a pointer to something we don't know what type it is.
 Because all addresses are addresses, but what they point to is different.
 And so, if you take a look at the alloc function, which we'll play a lot more in the next chapter,
 the alloc says, oh, give me 42 bytes, and give it back to me as a pointer.
 Give me a pointer to 42 new bytes that you just allocated.
 So if you go in the early 70s, alloc returned an int, but then we would cast it to whatever
 type we wanted.
 So we would say alloc 42, it would give us an address, that'd be an integer, but then
 we'd cast it to an integer star, which is a no-loss cast, and then we would store it.
 By the time in the 1978 CNR book, we tended to call it a char star, because 42 is how
 many characters we're gonna allocate.
 And then you would take the pointer to a character and cast it to a pointer to an integer, and
 so alloc of 42 would give us 14 integers, actually, I think if I got my multiplication
 right.
 But in modern C, we have this pointer, void pointer, which basically says, look, alloc
 is gonna return an address, and you have to cast it to something.
 So alloc 42 returns a void star, which is casted to an int star, which is a lossless
 cast, and not something that's gonna confuse the compiler, and then we store it in our
 int star variable.
 And so void, everything you'll ever touch will be using void, but I just wanted to give
 you a little bit of the history of it and why void's kind of not mentioned in this 1978
 book.
 Every time in class, I'm like, hey, it's time to learn about security, and everybody
 kind of groans like, oh, no.
 Back when I taught HTML injection and SQL injection and cross-site scripting in all my
 previous classes.
 And here's the classic XKCD, where the mom has named their child with a bit of SQL and
 some single quotes and some comments, and that's all fun.
 It's important that we as software developers are aware of how the things that we build
 could be corrupted by those with evil intent, right?
 So it has come time to talk about that for C. Probably the single worst security hole
 in all of computing history, from 1950 to today, even before C was a thing, is what's
 called buffer overflow.
 And it has to do with the fact that there is no sense that a string of characters has
 a length.
 It has an allocated length, but it doesn't have a runtime length.
 And so when we put more data into a string than can hold the string, it just keeps on
 storing beyond the end of the string.
 It doesn't like make a little more space.
 And so this is from the Wikipedia page, where you have an eight-character string followed
 by a two-character integer or something.
 And we copy the string excessive, which is a nine-character, which includes nine characters
 and the slash zero, the zero.
 And that completely overwrites by just trying to write into the A string, it overwrites
 the B variable as well.
 And so that's buffer overflow.
 It's sort of like somehow we're going to push too much into this variable so that it extends
 where it's been allocated and that never is detected, and then it keeps going on.
 And it means that you can do all kinds of things with buffer overflow.
 You can change variables.
 You can turn on super user permission.
 Who knows?
 You got to look at the source code.
 You got to carefully construct a sort of nasty attack.
 But the attack vector is the fact that string arrays bounds are not checked when we're copying
 stuff in.
 And if you write bad code or if the system writes bad code, it's just going to go wiping
 out memory.
 So it turns out that probably the worst offender of this is the get_s function.
 And this was part of standard C for a long time.
 And so here what I'm doing is I'm creating a 15-character string array, a character array,
 which is 15 elements, and I'm calling get_s.
 And the problem with get_s is like somebody's going to give us that data and it's not us.
 And then I print it out.
 So the first thing you see is when I compile a bit of code that has get_s, the compiler
 is upset.
 I have greatly simplified the errors.
 It comes up with three errors and this is a subset of one of the errors.
 The compiler is telling you don't use get_s.
 If you didn't hear what I said the first time, don't use get_s.
 And so the compiler is not happy.
 But it's like, you know, people write that so we're going to run it, okay?
 A.out, which starts the code, as soon as that line get_s runs, the runtime of the C standard
 sdio.h says before it prompts us for the data, it actually adds a print statement.
 It's not our print statement.
 It's the library saying you really, really should not be using get_s.
 And if you think this program is trustworthy, you're probably wrong.
 So I type hello world, which is 11 characters, hello space world.
 Yeah, it's 11 characters.
 Hello world's 11 characters.
 I type 11 characters in.
 That includes the 12th character, which is the backslash zero.
 And that fits into s15, a 15 element character array in the variable s.
 So the program works just fine.
 Then I type a.out again, and it once again tells me, please don't use get_s.
 You're going to be in so much trouble.
 And now I type instead a bunch of, a hello and a bunch of spaces in then world.
 And it prints out hello bunch of spaces in world, but has overwritten all kinds of unknown
 data after the s15.
 So that's, you know, that's like 30 or 25 or 30 characters.
 Then the first 15 are in s, but then the next 15 are somewhere else.
 And s is on the stack because it's an automatic variable in main, and it goes wiping out the
 rest of the stack.
 Now it turns out that the C runtime puts things on the stack to kind of mark or to catch this
 overflow.
 And so what happens is as soon as that code finishes, it says abort trap six, which is
 basically the C runtime saying, you know what, I'm not going to let this program proceed
 any further because there has been an array that got messed up.
 And it's not that it caught, it's not that it caught the array messing up.
 It didn't know how long it was.
 It just put characters in.
 But what it did is I put something after the array and then it checked for it later.
 And that got wiped out.
 And it's like, okay, you wiped out my magic little secret.
 And so I'm going to not let you continue.
 And so we don't want you to use get_s.
 And this is a buffer overflow.
 And I can give you, eventually maybe we will look at some much more complex examples of
 this where we try to like use something like get_s to manipulate what the program does
 rather than just blow the program up.
 But this is a very simple example of buffer overflow.
 So in summary, pointers are the beautiful, most beautiful part of C. They're complex,
 but basically pointers make it so that a high level language can function like a low level
 language.
 If we don't have pointers, and I mean not even kind of crappy Python ones, I mean pointers
 that we can look up and then dereference officially and formally and not have it be a sneaky way
 that we're doing it.
 That means that you can do the things that operating systems need to do, the kinds of
 things that we used to write assembly language for, meaning we're going to, here's a buffer
 of memory.
 We're going to copy this buffer.
 We're going to do another thing.
 There's another buffer and there's a linked list of all the different buffers.
 So understanding pointers leads you to the path of assembly language, machine language,
 and then ultimately hardware.
 So you should not rush through this material.
 Pointers are really, really important.
 Everything we're going to do from now on, pointer is just, I'm just going to say pointer,
 pointer, pointer, just like I say object-oriented all the time, I'm going to say pointer all
 the time.
 Pointers 5.7 and 5.10 through 5.12 are a little dense, so what I really want you to do is
 understand the stuff I just talked about and the corresponding sections.
 And chapter six will be more fun because we'll be doing much more with the pointers rather
 than just what is a pointer.
