 Welcome to C Programming for Everybody. My name is Charles Severance and this is
 my reading of the 1978 C Programming book written by Brian Kernigan and Dennis
 Ritchie. At times I add my own interpretation of the material from a
 historical perspective. Chapter 1, a tutorial introduction. Let us begin with
 a quick introduction to C. Our aim is to show the essential elements of the
 language in real programs but without getting bogged down in details, formal
 rules, and exceptions. At this point we are not trying to be complete or even
 precise. We want you to get as quickly as possible to the point where you can
 write useful programs and to do that we have to concentrate on the basics,
 variables and constants, arithmetic, control flow, functions, and the
 rudiments of input and output. We are quite intentionally leaving out of this
 chapter the features of C which are of vital importance for writing bigger
 programs. These include pointers, structures, and most of C's rich set of
 operators, several control flow statements, and a myriad of details. This approach
 has its drawbacks of course. Most notable is that the complete story on any
 particular language feature is not found in a single place. The tutorial by being
 brief may also mislead and because they cannot use the full power of C the
 examples are not as concise and elegant as they might be. We have tried to
 minimize these effects but be warned. Another drawback is that later chapters
 will necessarily repeat some of this chapter. In any case experienced
 programmers should be able to extrapolate from the material in this
 chapter to their own programming needs. Beginners should supplement it by
 writing small similar programs of their own. Both groups can use it as a
 framework on which to hang the more detailed descriptions that begin in
 chapter 2. 1.1 getting started. The only way to learn a new programming language
 is by writing programs in it. The first program to write is the same for all
 languages. Print the words "hello world". This is the basic hurdle. To leap over it
 you have to be able to create the program text somewhere, compile it
 successfully, load it, run it, and find out where your output went. With these
 mechanical details mastered everything else is comparatively easy. In
 traditional C the program to print "hello world" is main open parenthesis
 closed parenthesis, open curly brace, print F parenthesis double quote hello
 comma space world backslash n double quote, closed parenthesis semicolon, closed
 curly brace. The modern minimal version of this program needs a bit more syntax.
 We add a single line at the beginning hashtag include space left angle
 brackets stdio.h right angle bracket. Pound include stdio.h. We have to add
 that line for the modern program. Back to the book. Just how to run this program
 depends on the system that you're using. As a specific example on the Unix
 operating system you must create the source program in a file whose name ends
 in .c such as hello.c and then you compile it with the command cc space
 hello.c. If you haven't botched anything such as omitting a character or
 misspelling something the compilation will proceed silently and make an
 executable file called a.out. Running that by the command a.out will
 produce hello comma world as its output. On other systems the rules will be
 different. Check with a local expert. On modern systems we use the gcc compiler
 with the -ancy option to accept the legacy syntax of c. So we use gcc space
 -ancy space hello.c and to run the resulting a.out file you usually you
 need to prepend the local directory because most shell configurations do not
 include the current path in the paths to search for applications so you need to
 write ./a.out. Now for some explanations about the program itself. A c
 program whatever its size consists of one or more functions which specify the
 actual computing operations that are to be done. C functions are similar to
 functions and subroutines of a Fortran program or the procedures of PL1, Pascal
 etc. In our example main is such a function. Normally you're at liberty give
 functions whatever names you like but main is a special name. Your program
 begins executing at the beginning of main. This means every program must have
 a main somewhere. Main will usually invoke other functions to perform its
 job some coming from the same program and others from libraries of previously
 written functions. One method of communicating data between functions is
 by arguments. The parentheses following the function name surround the argument
 list. Here main is a function of no arguments indicated by open parentheses
 closed parentheses. The curly braces enclose the statements that make up the
 function. They're analogous to the do end of PL1 or the begin end of algal or
 Pascal and so on. A function is invoked by naming it followed by a parenthesized
 list of arguments. There is no call statement as there is in Fortran or PL1.
 The parentheses must be present even if there are no arguments. In the above
 text the authors were making connections to the popular general purpose
 programming languages of the time. When the book was written it was not all
 assured that C and C like languages would ever evolve past writing high
 performance applications like operating system kernels and device drivers. By
 comparing C to these more general purpose languages the authors are trying
 to plant the seed that C could have value as a general purpose language. Back
 to the text. The line that says print F parenthesis double quote hello comma
 space world backslash and double quote closed parentheses semicolon is a
 function call which calls a function named print F with the argument hello
 world. Print F is a library function which prints the output to the terminal
 unless some other destination is specified. In this case it prints the
 string of characters that make up its argument. Any sequence of any number of
 characters enclosed in double quotes is called a character string or string
 constant. For the moment our only use of the character strings will be as
 arguments to print F and other functions. The sequence backslash n in the string
 is C notation for the new line character which when printed advances the terminal
 to the left margin on the next line. If you leave out the backslash n, a
 worthwhile experiment by the way, you'll find that your output is not terminated
 by a line feed. The only way to get a new line character into the print F's
 argument is with backslash n. If you try to break it into two lines like print
 F quote hello world and then just hit the return double quote close parenthesis
 semicolon on a new line the C compiler will print out unfriendly diagnostics
 about missing quotes. Print F never supplies a new line automatically so
 multiple calls can be used to build up an output line in stages. Our first
 program could have just as well been written as main open parenthesis close
 parenthesis open curly brace print F quote hello quote semicolon print F
 quote world quote semicolon print F backslash n semicolon and then on a sixth
 line close curly brace and it would have produced the identical output. Note that
 backslash n represents only a single character an escape sequence like
 backslash n provides a general and extensible mechanism for representing
 hard-to-get or invisible characters. Among the others that C provides are
 backslash T for tab backslash B for backspace backslash double quote for
 double quote and backslash backslash for the backslash itself. 1.2 page 8
 variables and arithmetic. The next program prints the following table of
 Fahrenheit temperatures in their centigrade or Celsius equivalence. Using
 the formula C equals parenthesis 5 divided by 9 close parenthesis parenthesis F - 32.
 The table contains Fahrenheit of 0 Celsius of negative 17.8 Fahrenheit of
 20 Celsius of negative 6.7 Fahrenheit of 40 Celsius of 4.4 and so forth. Here is
 the program itself. For reference this program is on page 29 of the textbook.
 So it starts with #include stdio.h to include the standard
 library then it has a comment that says print the Fahrenheit Celsius table for F
 equals 0 comma 20 comma dot dot dot comma 300 close common main open
 parenthesis close parenthesis open curly brace int lower comma upper comma step
 semicolon float far comma Celsius lower equals zero semicolon followed by a
 comment upper equals 300 semicolon followed by a comment step equals 20
 semicolon followed by a comment far equals lower and then while open
 parenthesis far less than or equal to upper close parenthesis open curly brace Celsius
 equals parenthesis 5.0 slash 9.0 close parenthesis asterisk open parenthesis far
 minus 32.0 close parenthesis semicolon. Then a printf statement printf open
 parenthesis double quote percent 4.0 f space percent 6.1 f backslash n close
 quote comma far comma Celsius close parenthesis semicolon. Far equals far
 plus step and then a closing curly brace to finish the while statement and then a
 closing curly brace to finish the main statement. The first two lines slash
 star print Fahrenheit to Celsius table for F equals 0 comma 20 dot dot dot 300
 star slash are a comment which in this case explains briefly what the program
 does. Any characters between slash star and star slash are ignored by the
 compiler. They may be used to freely make the program easier to understand.
 Comments may appear anywhere a blank or new line can. In C all variables must be
 declared before use usually at the beginning of a function before any
 executable statements. If you forget a declaration you will get a diagnostic
 from the compiler. A declaration consider consists of a type and a list
 of variables that have that type as in int lower comma upper comma step
 semicolon float far comma Celsius semicolon. The type int implies that the
 variables listed are integers. Float stands for floating point i.e. numbers
 which may have a fractional part. Precision of both int and float depends
 on the particular machine that you are using. On the PDP 11 for instance an
 int is a 16-bit signed number. That is one that lies between negative 32,768
 and positive 32,767. A float number is a 32-bit quantity which
 amounts to about seven significant digits with a magnitude of about 10 to
 minus 38 and 10 plus 38. Chapter 2 lists the sizes for other machines. I would
 note that the 1970s was a time of transition in the amount of memory
 installed in computers. The C language int type was 16 bits in the older but
 more generally available computers like the PDP 11. C could be used to write
 programs like the UNIX operating system that made efficient use of available
 memory. In particular the 1978 version of C did not require that computers support
 32-bit integers. But 32,768 is a pretty small number. The size of an
 integer affected the maximum size of arrays and strings. A lot of early C
 programs used the long type to get at least a 32-bit integer capable of
 representing numbers up to about 2 billion. In modern computers and
 databases we tend to choose between 32-bit and 64-bit integers. Back to the
 text. C provides several other basic data types besides int and float. Char is
 a character, a single byte. Short is a short integer. Long is a long integer and
 double is a double precision floating point. The size of these objects are also
 machine dependent and details are in chapter 2. There are also arrays,
 structures, and unions of these basic types and pointers to them and functions
 that return them, all of which we will meet in due course. The actual
 computation in our temperature conversion program begins with the
 assignments lower equals zero, upper equals 300, step equals 20, far equals
 lower, all ending with semicolon. These set the variables to their starting
 values. Individual statements are terminated by semicolons. Each line of
 the table is computed in the same way so we use a loop which repeats once per
 line. This is the purpose of the while statement. While parentheses far less
 than or equal upper closed parentheses open curly brace, then the body of the
 loop, and then closed curly brace. The condition in the parentheses is tested.
 If it is true, i.e. far is less than or equal to upper, the body of the loop, all
 of the statements included between the open curly brace and the closed curly
 brace are executed. Then the condition is retested. If true, the body is executed
 again. When the test becomes false, i.e. far exceeds upper, the loop ends and
 execution continues at the statement that follows the loop. There are no
 further statements in the program so it terminates. The body of a while loop can
 be one or more statements enclosed in braces as the temperature converter or a
 single statement without braces as in while open parentheses i less than j
 closed parentheses, i equals 2 times i semicolon. In either case, the statements
 controlled by the while are indented by one tab stop so you can see at a glance
 what statements are inside the loop. The indentation emphasizes the logical
 structure of the program. Although C is quite permissive about statement
 positioning, proper indentation and the use of whitespace are critical in making
 programs easy for people to read. We recommend writing only one statement per
 line and usually leaving blanks around operators. The position of the braces is
 less important. We have chosen one of the several popular styles. Pick a style
 that suits you and then use it consistently. I would add that with these
 words the authors triggered a great debate about how to best indent code
 and use curly braces that continues to this day. The indentation style used in
 this book is often referred to as the KNR style. It tends to put open braces at
 the end of statements like if and while to keep code more compact in terms of
 the number of lines of code. The best advice is not to debate at all. When you
 modify someone else's code just imitate the style that they used when they wrote
 their code. Back to the text. Most of the work it's done in the body of the loop.
 The Celsius temperature is computed and assigned to the Celsius variable by the
 statement Celsius equals open parentheses 5.0 slash 9.0 close parentheses, asterisk
 open parentheses, far minus 32.0 close parentheses, semicolon. The reason for
 using 5.0 slash 9.0 instead of the simpler looking 5 slash 9 is that in C
 as in many other languages integer division truncates so that any fractional
 part is discarded. Thus 5 slash 9 is 0 and of course so would then all the
 temperatures be 0. A decimal point in a constant indicates that it is floating
 point so that 5.0 over 9.0 is 0.555 repeating which is what we want. We also
 wrote 32.0 instead of 32 even though since far is afloat 32 would
 automatically be converted to float before the subtraction. But as a matter
 of style it's wise to write floating-point constants with explicit
 decimal points even when they have integral values. It emphasizes their
 floating-point nature for human readers and ensures the compiler will see things
 the way you do as well. I would note that for those of you familiar with Python
 before Python 3 integer division truncated and returned an integer just
 like C. In Python 3 one of the major improvements was that the division of
 two integers performed the division operation in floating-point and returns
 a floating-point result. C and Python 2 made the choice because of efficiency.
 Integer division with truncation especially for 16-bit numbers was quite
 fast in the 1970s computers compared to floating-point division that kept the
 fractional part intact. Early PDP 11 computers did integer division in
 hardware while all floating-point was done with loops and functions so it was
 far slower. If you wanted to write fast code in 1970s you avoided floating-point
 numbers except for special situations. Modern computers usually do 64-bit
 floating-point operations almost at the same speed as integer division so we
 don't need to allow programmers to avoid using floating-point computations in
 their code. The detailed rules for when integers are converted to floating-point
 are in chapter 2. For now notice that the assignment far equals lower semicolon
 and the test while far less than or equals upper both work as expected. The
 int is converted to a float before the operation is done. This example also
 shows a bit more of how printf works. printf is actually a general purpose
 format conversion function which we will describe completely in chapter 7. Its
 first argument is a string of characters to be printed with each percent sign
 indicating where one of the other second third etc arguments is to be
 substituted and what form it is to be printed in. For instance in the statement
 printf parentheses double quote percent 4.0 F space percent 6.1 F
 backslash and double quote comma far comma Celsius the conversion specification
 percent 4.0 F says that a floating-point number is to be printed in a space at
 least four characters wide with no digits after the decimal point. Percent 6.1 F
 describes another number to occupy at least six spaces with one digit after
 the decimal point, analogous to the F 6.1 of Fortran or the F parentheses six
 comma one of PL 1. Parts of a specification may be omitted. Percent 6 F
 says that the number is to be at least six characters wide. Percent dot 2 F
 requests two places after the decimal point but the width is not constrained
 and merely percent F says to print the number itself as floating-point. Printf
 also recognizes percent D for decimal integers percent O for octal percent X
 for hexadecimal and percent C for characters and percent S for a character
 string and percent percent for the percent itself. Each percent
 construction in the first argument of printf is paired with its
 corresponding second, third, etc. argument. They must line up properly by
 number and type or else you'll get meaningless answers. By the way, printf
 is not part of the C language. There is no input or output defined in C itself.
 There is nothing magic about printf. It's just a useful function which is part of
 the standard library of routines that are normally accessible to C programs. In
 order to concentrate on C itself, we won't talk much about I/O
 until chapter 7. In particular, we'll defer formatted input until then. If you
 have to input numbers, read the discussion of the function scanf in
 chapter 7 section 7.4. Scanf is much like printf except that it reads input
 instead of writing output. The balance between building a feature into the
 language itself and providing it as a function in a library is something that
 computer language designers struggle with many years later. For example, in
 Python 2, print was a language element. In Python 3, one of the non-upwards
 compatible and somewhat unpopular changes was changing print to be a
 function. Many programmers feel that a print statement is a more elegant way to
 express printing, but from a compiler and language design perspective, a function
 call with a variable number of parameters is seen as technically more
 elegant and flexible. With Kernigan and Ritchie focused on keeping everything
 small and portable, they opted to keep all input/output functionality in
 libraries. The syntax is a little more complex, but given how computing has
 changed in the past 30 years, it is the right choice. Section 1.3, the "for"
 statement. As you might expect, there are plenty of different ways to write a
 program. Let's try a variation on the temperature converter. This is sample
 code is on page 11 of the textbook. Pound sign include less than stdio.h
 greater than. Main, open parenthesis, closed parenthesis, open curly brace. Int,
 far, that is F-A-H-R, semicolon. For, open parenthesis, far equals zero, semicolon. Far
 less than or equal to 300, semicolon. Far equals far plus 20, closed parenthesis.
 Printf, open parenthesis, double quote, percent 4d, space, percent 6.1f,
 backslash n, close quote. Comma, far, comma, open parenthesis, 5.0/9.0,
 closed parenthesis, asterisk, open parenthesis, far minus 32, closed parenthesis,
 closed parenthesis, semicolon. This code produces the same answers as the one
 before, but it certainly looks different. One major change is the elimination of
 most of the variables. Only far, F-A-H-R, remains as an int to show the percent D
 conversion in printf. The lower and upper limits of the step size appear only as
 constants in the for statement itself. For is a new construction and the
 expression that computes the Celsius temperature now appears as the third
 argument of printf, instead of in a separate assignment statement. This last
 change is an instance of a quite general rule in C. In any context where it is
 permissible to use the value of a variable of some type, you can use an
 expression of that type. Since the third argument of printf has to be a floating
 point value to match the percent 6.1f, any floating point expression can occur
 there. The for itself is a loop, a generalization of while. If you compare
 it to the earlier while, its operation should be clear. It contains three parts
 separated by semicolons. The first part, far equals zero, is done once before the
 loop proper is entered. The second part is the test or condition that controls
 the loop, far less than or equal to 300. This condition is evaluated. If it is
 true, the body of a loop, in this case a single printf is executed, then the
 reinitialization step far equals far plus 20 is done and the condition is
 reevaluated. The loop terminates when the condition becomes false. As with the
 while, the body of the loop can be a single statement or a group of
 statements enclosed in braces. The initialization and reinitialization parts
 can be any single expression. The choice between while and for is arbitrary and
 should be based on what seems clearer. The for is usually appropriate for loops
 in which the initialization and reinitialization are single statements
 and logically related, since it is more compact than while and keeps the loop
 control statements together in one place. I would note that the syntax of the for
 and while loop is a feature of C and derived C-like languages. In modern
 languages we tend to have two kinds of loop structures, determinant and
 indeterminate. The for and the while loop structures in C are both
 indeterminate because you must read them closely to make sure they are properly
 constructed and, for example, are not unintentionally infinite loops. An
 example of a determinant loop is the for each loop in PHP or the for loop in
 Python. The semantics of both of these loops is to iterate all the elements in
 a collection. But since collections are never infinite, you can be assured that
 these determinant loops will not run forever. Section 1.4, symbolic constants.
 A final observation before we leave temperature conversion. It's a bad
 practice to bury magic numbers or magic constants like 320, 320 in a
 program. They convey little information to someone who might read the program
 later and they're hard to change in a systematic way. Fortunately, C provides a
 way to avoid such magic numbers. With a pound sign defined construction at the
 beginning of a program, we can define a symbolic name or symbolic constant to be
 a particular string of characters. Thereafter, the compiler will replace all
 unquoted occurrences of the name by the corresponding string. Replacement for the
 name can actually be any text at all. It's not related to numbers. So this is
 a sample code on page 13 of the text. Pound sign include less than stdio.h
 greater than. Next line. Pound define lower zero. Next line. Pound
 define upper 300. Pound define step 20. For these pound sign
 statements, I would note that they have to start in the first column. The rest of
 this sample code is the code itself. Main open parentheses, closed parentheses, open
 curly brace, int, far, F-A-H-R. For, open parentheses, far equals uppercase lower,
 semicolon, far less than or equal to, uppercase upper, semicolon, far equals far
 plus uppercase step. And then the same print statement. Printf, open parentheses,
 double quote, percent 4D space, percent 6.1F backslash n, quote, comma, far, comma,
 percent 5.0/9.0, close parentheses, asterisk, open parentheses, far minus 32,
 close parentheses, close parentheses, semicolon, and then to end the program,
 close curly brace. The quantities, uppercase lower, uppercase upper, and
 uppercase step are constants, so they do not appear in declarations. Symbolic
 names are commonly written in uppercase, so they can be readily distinguished
 from lowercase variable names. Notice that there is no semicolon at the end of
 a pound define statement. Since the whole line after the defined name is
 substituted, there would be too many semicolons in the form. Section 1.5, a
 collection of useful programs. We are now going to consider a family of related
 programs for doing simple operations on character data. You will find that many
 programs are just expanded versions of the prototypes we discuss here. Character
 input and output. The standard library provides functions for reading and
 writing a character at a time. GetChar fetches the next input character each
 time it is called and returns the character as its value. That is, after C
 equals GetChar, open parentheses, close parentheses, the variable C contains the
 next character input. These characters normally come from the terminal or
 keyboard, but that need not concern us until chapter 7. The function putChar,
 open parentheses, C, close parentheses, is the complement of GetChar. PutChar, open
 parentheses, C, close parentheses, prints the content of the variable C on some
 output medium, again usually the terminal or screen. Calls to putChar and printf
 may be interleaved. The output may be, will appear in the order in which the
 calls are made. As with printf, there is nothing special about GetChar and
 putChar. They are not part of the C language, but they are universally
 available. Once again, I would note that the authors are making the case that the
 syntax of the language should not include syntax for input/output operations, but
 instead call library functions. Keeping the compiler small and easy to port new
 systems was important to the creators of C. And even if something like putChar
 was part of the language syntax, it would be translated at runtime to call a
 function. Programming languages from the 1960s tended to have a small set of use
 cases, read some input, run some calculation, and then write some output.
 So it seemed like a few language elements would be sufficient to describe all
 programs. But as programs started to make network connections, draw buttons on a
 screen, or respond to API calls over the network, it would have been difficult to
 keep expanding the core language syntax for each new use case. But it was
 extremely natural to add new libraries to languages like C with functions to
 call to accomplish these new use cases. File copying. Given GetChar and putChar,
 you can write a surprising amount of useful code without knowing anything
 more about input/output. The simplest example is a program which copies its
 input to its output one character at a time. In outline, here's what we do. Get a
 character. While the character is not the end-of-file signal, output the character
 we just read and then get a new character. Converting this into C gives
 us the sample code on page 14 of the textbook. Pound includes stdio.h, main
 open parenthesis close parenthesis open curly brace, int C semicolon, C equals
 GetChar open parenthesis, close parenthesis semicolon. While C not equal EOF,
 uppercase EOF, close parenthesis, open curly brace, putChar C, C equals GetChar
 semicolon, close parenthesis, close curly brace. The relational operator
 exclamation equals means not equal to. The main problem is detecting the end of the
 input. By convention, GetChar returns the value, which is not a valid character
 when it encounters the end of input. In this way, programs can detect when
 they did not get a character and they've actually simply run out of input. The
 only complication, which is a serious nuisance, is that there are two
 conventions in common use about what that end-of-file value really is. We have
 deferred this issue by using the same symbolic name EOF, capital EOF, for the
 value, whatever it might be. In practice, EOF will be either negative 1 or 0, so
 the program must be preceded by the appropriate pound-define EOF minus 1 or
 pound-define EOF 0 to work properly. By using the symbolic constant EOF to
 represent the value that GetChar returns when the end-of-file occurs, we are
 assured that only one thing in the program depends on the
 specific numeric value of EOF. I would know. Most of that is incorrect.
 Modern C compilers actually define EOF in the stdio.h include file, so you never
 define EOF in your code. In modern C, the value of EOF is minus 1. You should just
 include stdio.h and use predefined EOF constant to check for end-of-file. The
 nuisance of different values for EOF was resolved shortly after 1978.
 Continuing with the text, we also declare C to be an int, not a chair, char, so that
 it can hold the value which GetChar returns. As we'll see in chapter 2, the
 value is actually an int because it must be capable of representing end-of-file
 in addition to all possible characters. So the program for copying could actually
 be written more concisely by experienced C programmers. In C, any assignment such
 as C equals GetChar open parenthesis, closed parenthesis can be used in an
 expression. Its value is simply the residual value being assigned to the
 left-hand side. If the assignment of a character to the variable C is put
 inside the test part of a while statement, the file copy program can be
 written as shown in the example code on page 15 of the textbook. Pound include
 stdio.h main open parenthesis, closed parenthesis, open curly brace, int space C
 semicolon, while open parenthesis, open parenthesis, C equals GetChar open
 parenthesis, closed parenthesis, closed parenthesis, not equal EOF, closed
 parenthesis, put char C, parenthesis C, closed parenthesis semicolon, closed
 curly brace. The program gets a character, assigns it to C, and then tests whether
 the character was the end-of-file signal. If it was not, the body of the while is
 executed printing the character. The while then repeats. When the input is, end
 of input is finally reached, the while terminates and so does main. This
 version centralizes the input. There's now only one call to GetChar and
 shrinks the program. Nesting an assignment is a test of one of the
 places where C permits a valuable conciseness. It is possible to get
 carried away and create impenetrable code, though a tendency that we will try,
 though that is a tendency we will try to curb. It's important to recognize that
 the parentheses around the assignment within the conditional are really
 necessary. The precedence of exclamation equal, not equals, is higher than that of
 equals, the assignment operator, which means that in absence of parentheses, the
 relational test, exclamation equals, would be done before the assignment equals. So
 the statement C equals GetChar parentheses, open parentheses, closed parentheses, not
 equal EOF, is equivalent to C equals GetChar open, no, sorry, is equivalent to C
 equals open parentheses, GetChar open parentheses, closed parentheses, not
 equal EOF, closed parentheses. This has the undesired effect of setting. It is
 important to recognize that the parentheses around the assignment within
 the conditional are really necessary. The precedence of exclamation equals is
 higher than that of equals, which means that in the absence of parentheses, the
 relational test not equals would be done before the assignment. So the statement C
 equals GetChar not equal EOF is equivalent to C equals, open parentheses,
 GetChar not equal EOF, closed parentheses. This has the undesired effect of setting C
 to 0 or 1, depending on whether or not the call of GetChar encountered the end
 of file. More on this in chapter 2. The next program counts characters. It is a
 small elaboration of the copy program. This sample code is on page 16 of the
 textbook. #include stdio.h, main, open parentheses, closed parentheses, open
 curly brace, long, NC semicolon, NC equals 0 semicolon, while, open
 parentheses, GetChar, open parentheses, closed parentheses, exclamation equal EOF,
 plus plus NC semicolon, printf, double quote, percent, LD, backslash, N, double
 quote, comma, NC, parenthesis, semicolon, closed curly brace. The statement plus plus
 NC semicolon shows a new operator, plus plus, which means increment by 1. You
 could write NC equals NC plus 1, but plus plus NC is more concise and often more
 efficient. There is a corresponding operator, minus minus, to decrement by 1.
 The operators plus plus and minus minus can either be prefix operators, plus plus
 NC or postfix, NC plus plus. These two forms have different values and
 expressions, as will be shown in chapter 2, but plus plus NC and NC plus plus both
 increment NC. For the moment, we'll stick to the prefix form. The character
 counting program accumulates its count in a long variable instead of an int. On a
 PDP-11, the maximum value of an int is 32,767, and it would take relatively
 little input to overflow that counter if it were declared as an int. In Honeywell
 and IBM C, long and int are synonymous and much larger. The conversion
 specification percent LD signals to printf that the corresponding argument is
 a long integer. We again, as a note, we again see another reference to the fact
 that the number of bits of the int type is in transition in 1978. The older PDP-11
 used a 16-bit integer to save limited memory on a small, almost obsolete
 computer, while later computers from IBM and Honeywell have already switched to
 their int type to be 32 bits. This allowed code originally written for the
 PDP-11, like Unix or even the C compiler, to be recompiled on the IBM or
 Honeywell with very few changes. To cope with bigger numbers, you can use a double,
 which is a double length float. We will also use a for statement instead of a
 while to illustrate an alternate way to write a while loop. This code is the
 second sample code on page 16 of the textbook. Pound include STDI.H, main
 open parenthesis, closed parenthesis, open curly brace, double NC semicolon, for
 open parenthesis, NC equals zero, semicolon, getchar open parenthesis, closed parenthesis, not
 equal EOF, semicolon, plus plus NC, closed parenthesis, and then a semicolon. A
 semicolon in this case is an empty statement, because there's nothing in the
 body of the of the for loop, and at the end we say printf double quote percent
 dot zero F backslash N double quote comma NC closed parenthesis, semicolon,
 closed curly bracket. Printf uses percent F for both float and double. Percent dot
 zero F suppresses printing of the non-existent fraction part. The body of
 the for loop here is empty, because all the work is done in the test and
 reinitialization parts of the for loop. But the grammatical rules of C require
 that a for statement have a body. The isolated semicolon, technically a
 null statement, is there to satisfy that syntax requirement. We put it on a
 separate line to make it more visible. Before we leave the character counting
 program, observe that if the input contains no characters, the while or for
 test fails on the very first call to getchar, so that the loop program produces
 zero, the right answer. This is an important observation. One of the nice
 things about while and for is they are tested at the top of the loop
 before proceeding with the body. If there is nothing to do, nothing is done,
 even if that means never going through the loop body. Programs should act
 intelligently when handed input like no characters. The while and the for
 statements help ensure that they do reasonable things with boundary
 conditions. Line counting. The next program counts lines in its input. Input
 lines are assumed to be terminated by the new line character, backslash n, that has
 been carefully appended to every line written out. This is sample code on line
 17 of the textbook. Count includes the stdio.h, main, open parenthesis, closed
 parenthesis, open curly brace, int, c, comma, nl, semicolon. nl equals zero,
 semicolon, while, open parenthesis, open parenthesis, c equals getchar, open
 parenthesis, closed parenthesis, closed parenthesis, not equal eof, closed
 parenthesis, if, open parenthesis, c, double equals, single quote, backslash n,
 single quote, closed parenthesis, plus plus, nl, semicolon. Printf, double
 quote, percent d, backslash n, double quote, comma, nl, closed parenthesis,
 semicolon, closed curly brace. The body of the while loop now consists of an if,
 which in turn controls the increment plus plus nl. The if statement tests its
 parenthesized condition, and if true, does the statement or group of statements
 inside braces that follow. We have again indented to show what is controlled by
 what. The double equal sign in is the c notation for is equal to, like
 Fortran's dot eq dot. This symbol is used to distinguish the equality test, a
 question being asked, from the single equal sign used for assignment. Since
 assignment is about twice as frequently used as equality testing in typical C
 programs, it's appropriate that the operator be half as long. A single
 character can be written between single quotes to produce a value equal to the
 numerical value of the character in the machine's character set. This is called a
 character constant. So for example, single quote a single quote is a
 character constant. In the ASCII character set, its value is 65, the
 internal representation of the character a. Of course, double single quote a
 single quote is to be preferred over 65. Its meaning is obvious, and it is
 independent of a particular character set. These escape sequences that are
 used in character strings are also legal in character constants. So in tests and
 arithmetic and expressions, single quote backslash n single quote stands for the
 value of a new line character. You should note carefully that single quote
 backslash n is a single character, and in expressions is equivalent to a
 single integer. On the other hand, double quote backslash n double quote is a
 character string which happens to contain only one character. The topics of
 strings versus characters is discussed further in chapter two. The numeric bios
 that are shown for characters are using the ASCII character set. The character
 sets in the 1970s were quite intricate. Most were eight bits long to conserve
 computer memory and only support a hundred or so Latin-like characters. This
 is why early programming languages use special characters like asterisk and
 curly brace in their syntax very carefully. They needed to choose
 characters that were commonly available on computer keyboards from different
 manufacturers. Modern programming languages like Python 3 and Ruby store
 internal string values using the Unicode character set, so they are all able to
 represent all the characters in all languages around the world. Modern
 languages tend to represent eight-bit values in the range from 0 to 256 using
 a byte or similar type. Python 2 strings were stored as 8-bit bytes and Python
 3 strings are stored as 32-bit Unicode characters. Moving to Unicode was a
 major effort in the Python 2 to Python 3 transition. Word counting. The fourth in
 our series of useful programs counts lines, words, and characters. With a loose
 definition that a word is any sequence of characters that does not contain a
 blank, a tab, or a new line. This is a very very bare-bones version of the Unix
 utility WC. This example is on page 18 in the textbook. Pound include stdio.h
 pound to find yes, one, pound to find no, zero. Main, open parentheses, close parentheses,
 open curly brace. Int, c comma nl comma nw comma nc comma n word. n word equals no,
 nl equals nw equals nc equals zero. While, open parentheses, open parentheses, c
 equals getchar, not equal to eof. Open curly brace, plus plus nc. If, parentheses,
 c double equals quote backslash n quote, parentheses, plus plus nl. If, open
 parentheses, c double equals single quote space single quote, double vertical bar,
 c double equals single quote backslash n single quote, double vertical bar, c
 equals equals single quote backslash t single quote, close parentheses, n word
 equals no. Else, if, open parentheses, n word equal equal no, close parentheses, open
 curly brace, n word equals yes, semicolon, plus plus nw, semicolon, close curly
 brace, close curly brace. Printf, open parentheses, double quote percent d
 space percent d space percent d backslash n double quote comma nl comma nw comma
 nc, close curly brace. Every time the program encounters the first character
 of a word, it counts it. The variable n word records whether the program is
 currently in a word or not. Initially, it is not in a word, which is assigned the
 value no. We prefer the symbolic constants yes and no to the literal values
 1 and 0, because they make the program more readable. Of course, in a program as tiny
 as this, it makes little difference, but in larger programs, the increase of
 clarity is well worth the modest x effort to write it this way to make it
 more readable. You will also find that it's easier to make changes to programs
 where numbers appear only as symbolic constants. The line nl equals nw equals
 nc equals zero sets all three variables to zero. This is not a special case, but a
 consequence of the fact that an assignment has a value and assignments
 associate right to left. It's really as if we had written nc equals open
 parentheses nl equals open parentheses nw equals zero, close parentheses, close
 parentheses semicolon. The operator double vertical bar, vertical bar,
 vertical bar, means or. So the line if open parentheses c double equals single
 quote space single quote, vertical bar, vertical bar, c double equals single
 quote backslash n single quote, double vertical bar, c double equals quote
 backslash t quote parentheses says if c is a blank or c is a new line or c is a
 tab. The escape sequence backslash t is a visible representation of the tab
 character. There is a corresponding operator which is double ampersand for
 and. Expressions connected by double ampersand or double vertical bar are
 evaluated left to right and it is guaranteed that the evaluation will stop
 as true as true soon as the truth or falsehood for the overall expression is
 no. Thus, if c contains a blank there is no need to test whether contends contains
 a new line or tab. So these tests are not made. This isn't particularly important
 here but is very significant in more complicated situations as we will soon
 see. I would note that the double vertical bar and double ampersand are
 the norm for boolean operators in c-like languages. When a new language was being
 designed it was really easy to just adopt the c convention for logical
 operators because while they may seem cryptic, millions of software developers
 were already familiar with the operators. In this way the relationship between c
 and c-like languages is like the relationship between Latin and romance
 languages including English. Back to the text. The example also shows the c else
 statement which specifies an alternative action to be done if the condition part
 of an if statement is false. The general form is if open parentheses expression
 closed parentheses statement one else statement two. One and only one of the
 two statements associated with an if then else is done. If the expression is
 true statement one is executed. If not statement two is executed. Each
 statement can actually be in fact quite complicated. In the word count problem
 the one after the else is an if that controls two statements in braces.
 Section 1.6 arrays. Understanding the capabilities and limitations of c
 arrays is one of the most important topics in our historical look at the c
 programming language. Most importantly the number of elements in an array
 declaration must be a constant at compile time and the size of an array
 cannot be adjusted using an array declaration while the program's running.
 This inability to automatically resize c arrays as data is added leads to a
 class of security laws that are generally referred to as buffer overflow.
 Where a program reads more data in that can fit into an array and is tricked to
 overriding other data or code and compromising an application. Later in
 this book we will create dynamic array like structures in C using pointers and
 the standard library C alloc function. Python has support for non-dynamic arrays
 buffers. Python buffers are generally not used except for programmers writing
 library code that talks to low-level code written in a language other than
 Python or talking to operating system things like Linux. More commonly used
 Python list and dictionary structures and change their sizes automatically as
 elements are added and deleted at runtime. Java has support for non-dynamic
 arrays like C which are given a length at the moment they are created and the
 array length cannot be increased nor decreased without making a new array and
 copying all the elements from the first to the second array. Java does provide
 list and map structures that automatically adjust their length as data
 is added or removed. Java has a class called ArrayList which can be dynamically
 extended but provides array like linear access. It is a list internally but it
 can be used like an array externally. The underlying technique that is used to
 implement language structures like Python's list is dynamic memory
 allocation and a linked list structure. Linked lists are one of the most
 important data structures in all of computer science. We will cover dynamic
 allocation and implementing data structures in C in chapter 6. For now we
 will merely examine the syntax of C arrays but keep in mind that allocating
 an array in C is very different than creating a list in Python. Back to the
 text. Let us write a program to count the number of occurrences of each digit of
 white space characters like tab and new line and all other characters. This is an
 artificial problem to solve but it permits us to illustrate several aspects
 of C in one program. There are 12 categories of input so it is convenient
 to use an array to hold the number of occurrences of each digit rather than 10
 individual variables. Actually 12 individual variables. Here is one version
 of the program on page 21 in the textbook. I would note that as these
 programs get larger and larger it is harder and harder for you to just
 listen to me read them and you have to go look at them in the textbook. So I
 recommend that you go check out the textbook in page 20 and find this actual
 code. Pound include stdio.h main open parentheses closed parentheses open
 curly brace int C comma I comma n white comma n other semicolon int n digit open
 square bracket 10 closed square bracket semicolon and white equals n other
 equals 0 semicolon for open parentheses I equals 0 semicolon I less than 10
 semicolon plus plus I open I mean closed parentheses n digit open square bracket
 I closed square bracket equals 0 semicolon. Now we're going to have a loop
 to read all of our input while double open parentheses C equals get char open
 parentheses closed parentheses and another closed parentheses not equal EOF
 closed parentheses. If open parentheses C greater than or equal to single quote
 zero single quote double ampersand C less than or equal single quote nine
 single quote closed parentheses plus plus n digit open square bracket C minus
 single quote zero single quote closed square bracket semicolon else if open
 parentheses C double equals space quote space quote or double vertical bar C
 double equals single quote backslash and single quote double vertical bar C
 double equals single quote backslash T single quote closed parentheses plus plus
 n white semicolon else plus plus n other but if statement was a sort of a three
 branch yet if checking to see if we were doing a digit of white space character
 or some other character at the end of the while loop we're not the end of the
 lot while loop and so we say print F parentheses double quote digits equals
 double quote closed parentheses semicolon. Now we'll note in this that there is no
 new line so we can have these print F's kind of concatenate outward without
 going to a separate line. For parentheses I equals zero semicolon I less than 10
 semicolon plus plus I closed parentheses print F double quote space percent D
 double quote comma n digit open square bracket I closed square bracket closed
 parentheses semicolon. Print F open parentheses double quote backslash n
 white space equals percent D comma other equals percent D backslash and double
 quote comma n white comma n other closed parentheses semicolon closed curly
 brace. Let's go through the code. The declaration int n digit open square
 bracket 10 closed square bracket semicolon declares n digit to be an
 array of ten integers. Array of subscripts always start and zero in C
 rather than one as in Fortran or PL1 so the elements are n digit sub zero n
 digit sub 1 dot dot dot n digit sub 9. Square brackets are the sub. This is
 reflected in the for loops which initialize and print the array. A
 subscript can be any integer expression which of course includes
 integer variables like I and integer constants. This particular program relies
 heavily on the properties of character representation of the digits. For example
 if C greater than or equal to single quote 0 single quote double ampersand C
 less than or equal to single quote 9 single quote closed parentheses determines
 whether it's a digit. That is if the numeric value of the digit and the
 numeric value of the digit is C minus double quote 0 double quote. This only
 works if double quote 0 double quote 1 etc are positive and increasing order
 and there's nothing but digits between 0 and 9. Fortunately this is true for all
 conventional character sets. By definition arithmetic involving chars and
 ints converts everything to int before proceeding. So char variables and
 constants are essentially identical to ints in arithmetic
 contexts. This is quite natural and convenient for example C minus single
 quote 0 single quote is an integer expression that gives us a value between
 0 and 9 an integer value between 0 and 9 corresponding to the character quote 0
 quote 2 quote 9 quote stored in C and is thus a valid subscript for the 10
 element array and digit. The decision as to whether the character is a digit a
 white space or something else is made by the sequence if open parentheses C
 greater than or equal to quote 0 quote double ampersand C less than or equal
 quote 0 quote a quote 9 quote closed parentheses plus plus and digit open
 square bracket C minus quote 0 quote closed bracket semicolon. Else if C double
 equals single quote or C double equals single quote backslash n or C double
 equals single quote backslash t plus plus n white. Else plus plus n other. The
 pattern if in parentheses condition statement else if parentheses condition
 statement else statement occurs frequently in programs as a way to
 express a multi-way decision. The code is simply read from the top of the bot
 to until the bottom until some condition is satisfied. At that point the
 corresponding statement part is executed and the entire construction is finished.
 Of course statement can be several statements enclosed in braces. If none
 of the conditions are satisfied the statement after the final else is
 executed if present. If the final else and statement are omitted as in the word
 count program no action takes place. There can be an arbitrary number of else
 if condition statements groups between the initial if and the final else. As a
 matter of style is advisable to format this construction as we have shown with
 proper indentation so that long decisions do not march off the right
 side of the page. The switch statement to be discussed in chapter 3 provides
 another way to write multi-way branching that is particularly suitable when the
 condition being tested is simply whether some integer or character
 expression matches one of a set of constants. For contrast we will present a
 switch version of this program in chapter 3. Functions. In C a function is
 equivalent to a subroutine or function in FORTRAN or a procedure in PL 1
 Pascal etc. A function provides a convenient way to encapsulate some
 computation in a black box which can then be used without worrying about its
 innards. Functions are really the only way to cope with the potential
 complexity of large programs. With properly designed functions it is
 possible to ignore how a job gets done knowing what is done is sufficient. C is
 designed to make the use of functions easy convenient and efficient. You will
 often see a function only a few lines long called only once just because it
 clarifies some piece of code. So far we have used functions like printf getchar
 and putchar that have been provided for us. Now it's time to write a few of our
 own. Since C has no exponentiation operator like the double asterisk of
 FORTRAN or PL 1 let us illustrate the mechanics of function definition by
 writing a function power open parenthesis m comma n close parenthesis to raise an
 integer into a positive power n. That is the value of power parenthesis 2 comma 5
 is 32. This function certainly doesn't do the whole job of exponentiation since it
 only handles positive powers of small integers but it is best to confuse only
 one issue at a time. Here is the function power and a main program to exercise it
 so you can see the whole structure at once. This sample code is on page 23 of
 the textbook. Pound include stdio.h main open curly brace int i semicolon for
 parentheses i equals 0 semicolon i less than 10 semicolon plus plus i close
 parenthesis. printf double quote percent d space percent d space percent d backslash n double quote comma i comma power open
 parenthesis 2 comma i close parenthesis comma power open parenthesis negative 3
 comma i close parenthesis close parenthesis semicolon close curly brace
 the end of the main. Now we begin the function. Power open parenthesis x comma n
 close parenthesis int x comma n semicolon open curly brace int i comma p p
 equals 1 for open parenthesis i equals 1 semicolon i less than or equal to n
 semicolon plus plus i. p equals p times x semicolon return open parenthesis p
 close parenthesis semicolon close curly brace. Each function has the same form.
 Function name open parenthesis argument list if any followed by argument
 declarations if any followed by the body of the function which includes
 declarations and statements. Functions can appear in either order and in one
 source file or two. If of course the source file appears in two files you will
 have to say more to compile and load it than if all appears in one but that's an
 operating system matter not a language attribute. For the moment we'll just
 assume that both functions are in the same file so whatever you learned
 about C programs running them will not change. The function power is called twice
 in the line printf open parenthesis double quote percent d space percent d
 space percent d backslash n double quote comma i comma power open parenthesis 2
 comma i close parenthesis comma power open parenthesis negative 3 comma i
 close parenthesis close parenthesis. Each call passes two arguments to the power
 function which each time returns an integer to be formatted and printed. In
 the expression power open parenthesis 2 comma i is just an integer as 2 and i are. Not
 all functions produce an integer value and we'll take this up in more detail in
 chapter 4. In power the arguments have to declared appropriately so their types
 are known before the beginning of the body of the function. This is done by the
 line int x comma n semicolon that follows the function name. The argument
 declarations go between the argument list and the opening left brace. Each
 declaration is terminated by a semicolon. The names used for power and for its
 arguments are purely local to power and not accessible to any other functions.
 Other routines can use the same names for their variables without conflict. This
 is all so true of the variables i and p within the function. The i and power is
 unrelated to the i in main. The value that power compute computes is returned
 to main by the return statement which is just as in PL 1. Any expression must
 occur within the parentheses. A function need not return a value. A return
 statement with no expression causes control but no useful value to be
 returned to the call caller as does falling off the end of a function by
 reaching the terminating right curly brace. Section 1.8 arguments call by
 value. One aspect of C function which may be unfamiliar to programmers who are used
 to other languages particularly Fortran and PL 1. In C all function arguments
 are passed by value. This means that the called function is given the values of
 its arguments in temporary variables actually on a stack rather than their
 addresses. This leads to some different properties than are seen with call by
 reference languages like Fortran and PL 1 in which the called routine is handled
 the address of the argument not its value. It may seem strange that the
 authors are calling so much attention to the fact that function arguments are
 passed call by value in the very first chapter. Most modern programming
 languages like Python PHP or Java pass single value arguments by value by
 default and to pass in an argument by reference you need to do something
 special like adding the ampersand in the function declaration in PHP. Passing by
 reference was the norm before C and passing by value was the norm after C.
 Since modern languages were deeply influenced by and often written in C
 passing by value is the norm for modern languages. It's nice because it isolates
 the data in the calling code from the called code so the called code can't
 easily mess with its arguments either intentionally or by mistake and create
 an unexpected side effect and possibly a bug or security flaw in the calling code.
 It was a bit of work to make pass by value work in C. C implements a call stack
 where a bit of memory is automatically allocated at each function call and C
 makes a copy of the values in the calling code to pass them into the called
 code in a way that the calling code can see the values and change their local
 copies without affecting the values in the calling code. The same call stack
 that made it possible for C function arguments to be passed by value also
 made it possible for a function to call itself recursively. Fortran functions
 could not be called recursively until the 1990 version of Fortran. If you know
 your Python you know that simple variables like integers and strings are
 passed by value while structured data like dictionaries and lists are passed
 by reference i.e. the called function can modify its arguments. We will later see
 this in C as well. Talking about call stacks recursive functions and the fact
 that arrays and structured are called by reference is jumping ahead somewhat. So
 for now let's just remember the author's point that normal values
 like integers and floats are passed by value in C. Back to the text. The main
 distinction is that in C the called function cannot alter a variable in the
 calling function. It can only alter its private temporary copy. Call by value is
 an asset however not a liability. It usually leads to more compact programs
 with fewer extraneous variables because arguments can be treated as conveniently
 initialized local variables in the called routine. For example here is a
 version of power which makes use of this fact. This code is on page 24 of the text.
 Power open parenthesis x comma n close parenthesis int x comma n semicolon open
 curly brace int i comma p semicolon for open parenthesis p equals 1 semicolon n
 greater than 0 semicolon minus minus n close parenthesis p equals p times x
 semicolon return open parenthesis p close parenthesis semicolon close curly
 brace. The argument n is used as a temporary variable and is counted down
 until it becomes 0. There is no longer a need for the variable i as in the
 previous example. Whatever is done to n inside the power function has no effect
 on the argument that power was originally called with. When necessary it
 is possible to arrange for a function to modify the variable in the calling
 routine. The caller must provide the address of their variable to be set
 technically a pointer to the variable and the called function must declare the
 argument to be a pointer and reference the actual variable indirectly through
 it. We will cover this in detail in chapter 5. When the name of an array is
 used as an argument the value passed to the function is actually the location
 or address of the beginning of the array. There is no copying of the elements in
 the array. By subscripting this value the function can access and alter any element
 of the array in the calling code. This is the topic of the next section. Now I
 would recommend that you're careful looking at the code samples in the rest
 of this chapter. Recall that in C array sizes do not grow and shrink
 dynamically at all after they're allocated. The author statically allocate
 character arrays capable of handling up to 1,000 characters long. Their code
 works but it is somewhat brittle. So look at the next two sections as examples of
 C syntax with many important concepts about character strings stored as arrays
 and calling patterns when passing arrays to functions as parameters. But not
 exactly the best practice when handling dynamically sized data. Back to the text.
 Probably the most common type of array in C is an array of characters. To
 illustrate the use of character arrays and functions to manipulate them let's
 write a program that reads a set of lines and prints the longest. The basic
 outline is simple enough. While there's another line, if it's longer than the
 previous longest, save it and its length and at the very end print the longest
 line. The outline makes it clear that the program divides naturally into pieces.
 One piece gets a new line, another checks it, another saves it, and then the rest
 controls the process. Since things divide so nicely, it would be well
 to write them that way too. Accordingly, let's write first a separate function
 called get line to fetch the next line of input. This is a generalization of get
 char. To make the function useful in other contexts, we'll try to make it as
 flexible as possible. At the minimum, get line has to return a signal about
 possible end of file. A more generally useful design would be to return the
 length of the line or zero if the end of file is encountered. Zero is never a
 valid line length since every line has at least one character. Even a line
 containing only a new line has length one. I would note that here in chapter
 one, we have changed the book's original use of the function name get line to get
 underscore line in the code examples because it conflicts with the
 stdio.h that defines get line as a library function. In this chapter, the
 authors are providing examples around function naming and linking. In later
 chapters, code samples will simply use the built-in get line without an
 underscore to read an input. When we find a line that is longer than the
 previous longest, it must be saved somewhere. This suggests a second
 function, copy, to copy the new line to a safe place. Finally, we need a main
 program to control get line and copy. Here is the result. The sample code for
 this is on page 26 and it's a bit long so you might want to show take a look at
 the sample code in a browser. Pound include stdio.h. Pound define max line
 1000. Main open paren closed paren. Open curly brace. Int len semicolon which is
 the current line length. Int max semicolon which is the maximum length
 we've seen so far. Char line open square bracket max line closed square bracket
 semicolon. A character array that's the current input line and then char save
 open square bracket max line closed square bracket semicolon which is a
 character array that has the longest line where we're going to save it. On to
 the code. Max equals 0 while open paren open paren len equals get line open
 paren line comma max line closed paren closed paren greater than 0. If len is
 greater than max open curly brace max equals len to save it and then copy line
 comma save. Close curly brace. If open paren max greater than 0 i.e. there was a
 line. Print f open paren double quote percent s double quote comma save. Close
 curly brace to end the main program. Now we're in the first function. Get line
 open parentheses s comma lim closed parentheses. Char s open bracket closed
 bracket semicolon. Since it's being passed in as an argument we don't need
 to know the length of it and the next argument is int lim semicolon. So get
 line takes the character array of unknown length and a limit that tells us
 the length of the character array. Open curly brace int c comma i semicolon. For
 open parentheses i equals 0 semicolon i less than lim minus 1 double ampersand
 parentheses c equals get char open parentheses closed parentheses closed
 parentheses not equal eof and double ampersand c not equal single quote
 backslash n back single quote semicolon plus plus i. And in the body of the loop
 it's s open square bracket i closed square bracket equals c. From now on I'll
 read that s sub i equals c. At the end of the loop we say if open parentheses c
 double equals single quote backslash n single quote closed parentheses open
 curly brace s sub i equals c plus plus i closed curly brace. S sub i equals quote
 backslash 0 quote semicolon return open parentheses i closed parentheses semicolon
 closed curly brace. And that's the end of the get line function. And now we on to
 the copy function. Copy open parentheses s1 s2 closed parentheses. The purpose of this
 function is copy s1 to s2 assume that s2 is big enough. The declaration is char
 s1 open square bracket closed square bracket comma s2 open square bracket
 closed square bracket. As a note these arrays have a size we just don't know
 what they are and we hope that they're large enough. The body of the copy
 function starts with open curly brace int i semicolon i equals 0 while open
 parentheses open parentheses s2 sub i equals s1 sub i closed parentheses not
 equal single quote backslash 0 single quote plus plus i closed curly brace to
 end the copy function. Main and get line communicate both through a pair of
 arguments and a returned value. In get line the arguments are declared by the
 lines char s open square bracket closed square bracket semicolon int lim
 semicolon. Specify that the first argument is an array of unknown length and the
 second is an integer. The length of the array s is not specified in get line
 since it's determined in main. Get line uses return to send a value back to the
 caller just as the function power did. Some functions return a useful value
 others like copy are only used for their effect and return no value. Get line
 puts the character backslash 0 the null character whose integer value is 0 at
 the end of the array it's creating to mark the end of the string of characters.
 This convention is also used by the C compiler. When a string
 constant like double quote H E L L O backslash N double quote is written in a
 C program a compiler creates an array of characters containing the characters of
 the string and adds a backslash 0 at the end to terminate it so that functions
 such as printf can detect the end. So that would lead to an array that has H E
 L L O backslash N backslash 0. So it's a 5 character array with a new line which
 is a sixth character and then backslash 0 which is an actual character. Again we
 don't know the arrays don't know their length and so you use the backslash 0
 as the indicator of the end of a string. The percent s format specification in
 printf expects a string represented in exactly this form. If you examine copy
 you will discover that it too relies on the fact that its input argument s1 is
 terminated by backslash 0 and it copies this character backslash 0 into the
 argument output argument s2. All of this implies that backslash 0 is not part of
 normal text it's merely a marker. It is worth mentioning in passing that even a
 program as small as this one presents some sticky design problems. For example
 what should main do if it encounters a line which is bigger than its limit?
 Get line works properly and that it stops collecting when the array is full
 even if no new line has been seen. By testing the length and the last
 character returned main can determine whether the line was too long and cope
 with it as it wishes. In interests of brevity we have ignored this issue.
 There's also no way for a user of get line function to know in advance how
 long an input line might be so get line checks for overflow. On the other hand a
 user of the copy function already knows or should be able to find out how big
 the strings are so we have chosen not to add error checking to it.
 Section 1.10 scope external variables. The variables in main line
 save etc are private or local to main because they are declared within main no
 other function can have direct access to them. The same is true of the variables
 in the other functions for example the variable i in get line is unrelated to
 the i in copy. Each local variable in a routine comes into existence only when a
 function is called and disappears when the function is exited. It is for this
 reason that such variables are usually known as automatic variables following
 terminology in other languages. We'll use the term automatic henceforth to refer
 to these dynamic local variables. Chapter 4 discusses the static storage class in
 which local variables do retain their values between function invocations.
 Because automatic variables come and go with function invocation they do not
 retain their values from one call to the next and must be explicitly set upon
 each entry. If they are not set they will contain garbage. As an alternative to
 automatic variables it is possible to define variables which are external to
 all functions that is global variables which can be accessed by name by any
 function that cares to. This function is rather like Fortran common or PL one
 external. Because external variables are globally accessible they can be used
 instead of arguments to communicate data between functions. Furthermore because
 external variables remain in existence permanently rather than appearing and
 disappearing as functions are called and exited they retain their values even
 after the functions that set them are done. An external variable has to be
 defined outside of any function. This allocates actual storage for it. The
 function also must be declared and each function that wants to access it. This
 may be done either by an explicit extern declaration or implicitly by
 context. To make the discussion concrete let's rewrite the longest line program
 with line, save, and max as external variables. This requires changing the
 calls, declarations, and bodies of all three functions. This sample code is on
 page 29 of the textbook and it's pretty long but I'll read it for you.
 Pound include stdio.h. Pound define max line 1000. We're still outside of main.
 Char line open bracket max line close bracket semicolon. Char save open bracket
 max line semicolon. Int max semicolon. Those are our three global variables.
 Starting the main. Main open paren close paren open curly brace. Int len. Extern
 int max. So we're saying that this is an integer but it's also not to be
 allocated inside of main. Extern char save open square bracket close square
 bracket. The line length the length of the save array is defined above so we
 don't need to define it here. Max equals zero semicolon. While double parentheses
 len double left parentheses len equals get line parentheses greater than zero
 parentheses. If parentheses len greater than max open curly brace max equals len
 copy open parentheses no parentheses semicolon no parameters to copy because
 it's going to simply talk to the global variables. Close curly brace. After the
 loop finishes we say if open parentheses max greater than zero then printf open
 parentheses double quote percent s double quote comma save close parentheses
 semicolon close close curly brace and that is the end of the main. So now we
 have the get line function which is specialized to deal with external
 variables okay. So we start get line open parentheses close parentheses no
 parameters open curly brace int comma c comma int c comma i semicolon. These are
 local variables. Extern char line open curly brace close curly brace semicolon.
 This is the our reference inside of get line to the global variable line. For
 open parentheses i equals zero semicolon i less than max line minus one max line
 minus one max line is a predefined constant at compile time. For i less
 than max line minus one double ampersand parentheses c equals get char open
 parentheses close parentheses close parentheses not equal eof double
 ampersand i.e. and c not equal single quote backslash n single quote semicolon
 plus plus i. Line sub i equals c. That's the for loop that in effect reads
 characters one at a time and puts them in line. After the for loop we say if
 open parentheses c double equals single quote backslash n single quote close
 parentheses open curly brace line sub i equals c plus plus i close curly brace.
 This ensures that we append the new line to the function. Line sub i equals
 single quote backslash zero backslash that's semicolon the that's the string
 termination character. Return i return open parentheses i close parentheses. This
 is the length that get line is returning and then close curly brace to end the
 get line function. And then we have the copy function and again it takes no
 parameters. Copy open parentheses close parentheses curly brace int i extern
 char line open bracket close bracket comma save open bracket close bracket
 semicolon. i equals zero while parentheses open parentheses open parentheses save
 sub i equals line sub i close parentheses is not equal quote backslash zero quote
 plus plus i. Close curly brace for copy. So the external variables in main get
 line and copy are defined by the very first lines in the example above outside
 of main which state their type and cause storage to be allocated for them.
 Syntactically external definitions are just like the declarations we use
 previously but because they occur outside of any function including outside the
 main function the variables are external. Before a function can use or access an
 external variable the name of the variable must be made known to the
 function. One way to do this is to write an extern declaration in the function.
 The declaration is the same as before except for the added keyword extern. In
 certain circumstances the extern declaration can be omitted. If the
 external definition of the variable occurs in the same source file before
 it's used in a particular function then there's no need for an extern
 declaration in the function. The extern declarations in main and get line and
 copy are thus redundant. In fact common practice is to place all definition of
 all external variables at the beginning of the source file and then omit all
 extern declarations. If the program is in several source files and a variable is
 defined in say file 1 and used in file 2 then an extern declaration is needed in
 file 2 to connect the two occurrences of the variables. This topic is discussed at
 length in chapter 4. You should note that we are using the words declaration and
 definition very carefully when we refer to external variables in this section.
 Definition refers to the place where the variable is actually created or assigned
 storage. Declaration refers to places where the nature of the variable is
 stated but no storage is allocated. By the way there is a tendency to make
 everything in sight an extern variable because it appears to simplify things.
 Argument lists are short and variables are always there when you want them but
 external variables are always there also when you don't want them. The style of
 coding is fraught with peril since it leads to programs whose data connections
 are not at all obvious. Variables can be changed in unexpected and even
 inadvertent ways and the program is hard to modify when it becomes necessary. The
 second version of the longest line program is inferior to the first partly
 because of these reasons and partly because it destroys the generality
 of two quite useful functions by hardwiring them into the names of the
 variables they will manipulate. Section 1.11 summary. At this point we have
 covered what might be called the conventional core of C. With this
 handful of building blocks it's possible to write useful programs of considerable
 size and it probably a good idea if you paused long enough to do so. The
 exercises that follow are intended to give you suggestions for programs of
 somewhat greater complexity than the ones presented in this chapter. After you
 have this much C under control it will be well worth your effort to read on
 for the features covered in the next few chapters are where the power and
 expressiveness of the language begin to become apparent. This work is based on
 the 1978 C programming book written by Brian W. Kernigan and Dennis M. Ritchie.
 Their book is copyright all rights reserved by AT&T but is used in this
 work under fair use because of the book's historical and scholarly
 significance, its lack of availability, and the lack of an accessible version of
 the book. The book is augmented in places to help understand its right place in a
 historical context amidst the major changes of the 1970s and 1980s as
 computer science evolved from a hardware-first vendor-centered approach
 to a software-centered approach where portable operating systems and
 applications written in C could run on any hardware. This is not the ideal book
 to learn C programming because the 1978 edition does not reflect the modern C
 language. Using an obsolete book gives us an opportunity to take students back in
 time and understand how the C language was evolving as it laid the groundwork
 for a future with portable applications.
