 - Hello, and welcome to chapter one of Kernigan and Ritchie.
 My name's Charles Severance, and of course,
 I'm your professor for this course that's about history.
 So, welcome to this course.
 It's really part of a learning path.
 I don't think that C should be your first programming language,
 and I don't think it should be your last programming language.
 I have a whole series of courses
 that are all free and available online,
 both just on the web, on places like Free Code Camp,
 in Coursera, and edX, and the place that you're at
 in my learning path that you're at right now is C programming,
 and we're not learning C programming to learn C programming,
 we're learning C programming to take a historical look
 at how computers work and lead into computer architecture.
 I'm not trying to teach you coding in C,
 but I am going to explain how computers work
 and things like how Java works using C
 as kind of like the,
 it just gives me a way to explain Java to you.
 So, the outline of the textbook
 is a pretty typical computer science textbook
 where it starts off easy and then,
 whoa, everything goes pretty crazy.
 So chapters one through four,
 and we're on chapter one right now,
 is mostly syntax, and it's just another programming language,
 and especially if you know a little bit of Java
 or a little bit of PHP or a little bit of JavaScript,
 some of that syntax is gonna be like,
 whoa, of course this is familiar,
 and the answer is, well, that's because
 all those languages came from C.
 So it kind of feels like just another programming language
 except that arrays are not lists,
 and character arrays are not strings,
 and character arrays kind of look like strings,
 but they don't work like strings,
 and you can get in all kinds of trouble.
 But other than that, once you sort of stop worrying
 about how long things are, pretend it's okay,
 which is dangerous, of course, when you write code.
 Chapters one through four feel a lot like
 you're just any other programming language,
 but then chapters five and six
 are the valuable chapters of this book,
 but they also become a lot more difficult.
 So don't give chapters one through four a short shrift
 because five and six are gonna just go, woo.
 And then seven and eight is just sort of filling in detail,
 and seven and eight are not so critical.
 It just kind of fills in all the gaps.
 So that's the outline of the book.
 Just expect that one through four is gonna be smooth,
 and then five and six are gonna be like,
 now we're really getting somewhere, okay?
 So looking at chapter one, again,
 chapters, sections one through one, five,
 looks not that different than any other programming language
 that you've learned.
 It's chapter one, section 1.6 is arrays.
 Eostatic allocation, arrays, you have to know
 how big they are when you declare them,
 and you can't resize them until chapter five,
 at which point we'll start talking about
 dynamic memory and pointers and resizing.
 Chapter 1.7 and 1.8, functions and parameters,
 and it's all call by value in this early phase.
 Call by reference is in chapter five,
 'cause we need to know about pointers
 before we talk about chapter five,
 even though they use a little pointer syntax
 here and there in chapter one.
 And section 1.9 is character arrays,
 read this one closely,
 because there is no string object in C.
 There's no objects at all in C.
 And in section 1.10, they talk about variable scoping
 between functions, and that feels kind of similar
 to other languages, and part of it is because
 other languages took their inspiration from C.
 So if we just take a quick look at C character arrays,
 we must understand that the size of the character array
 is at allocation time, and there is nothing auto-extended.
 And if you write a for loop that goes off the end
 of the loop, like I've got, where I have a character array
 that's 10 long, and I write a loop that goes up to 1,000,
 storing data in it, eventually the program will blow up,
 and you can see, in Python, you just add characters,
 whereas in C, if you add characters
 beyond what was allocated, the system blows up.
 And you probably heard me say more than once
 that the C language is probably responsible
 for 90% of the significant security holes
 in all of computing, and this kind of code,
 where you allocate an array and then you wildly go beyond it,
 ends up making it so that people can inject things
 into operating systems and routers and all kinds of things.
 So this is why we don't use C to write programs.
 I mean, here we are in the first page.
 The example one of chapter one is why we don't write C
 very often, or if we do, we have to be really careful
 at reviewing it and making sure that it's right.
 It's really fast, but it's also dangerous.
 String constants and character constants.
 Strings and characters in most languages,
 Java's a little different, but PHP, Python, and JavaScript
 treat single and double quotes roughly the same,
 and they create string constants,
 and that's a multi-character thing that has a length.
 C doesn't have a multi-character thing, has a length.
 It has an array of characters.
 It has a zero character at the end of it.
 In C, single quotes are a single character,
 and double quotes are a character array.
 So a single, a double quote with one character in it
 is actually two bytes, 'cause it's the character
 and the string ending.
 Whereas in Python, a string has a length.
 It doesn't really have an ending character.
 There's a special character that we use for an ending.
 In C, a character is a byte, which is a short integer,
 usually eight bits in most computers,
 and so we, you gotta be real careful.
 You got double quote things and single quote things,
 and single quote things in C are far more like integers
 and far less like strings, and so in Python,
 you just use them interchangeably,
 single quotes and double quotes.
 Character sets.
 The char in C is like a number.
 It's a tiny number.
 It's eight bits long, so you can go from zero to 255,
 and the character representations depend
 on the character set, but quite often, they're ASCII,
 and so you can just go look up an ASCII chart
 and figure out what the numeric representation
 of the letter A is, and in Python,
 we can actually see the ordinal position of A
 by using the ord function, but that's the ord function
 of a single character string, which pulls the ord
 of the very first character, and we find that it's 65,
 and if you look up in the ASCII chart, it's 65,
 but in Python, Python 3, Python 3 are multi-byte characters
 that represent Unicode, and Unicode is much larger
 than eight bits.
 I think Unicode is 32 bits.
 UTF-8 is a way to represent Unicode,
 and Unicode is a 32-bit character set,
 and so if you say what is the integer equivalent
 of the character smiley face, you see that it's 128,522,
 and that's in a space of 32-bit, it's a 32-bit integer,
 and that's the character point within that 32-bit integer
 that represents smiley face.
 In C, there is no smiley face.
 You can't represent, well, unless you put a bunch
 of libraries into it, but the norm out of the box C
 can't represent a smiley face.
 It can represent an uppercase A, and you can say
 what is the A, and you'll notice we're printing it out
 with a percent C and a percent D, and it's the same thing.
 If you print a character out as a character, it's an A,
 and if you print it out as an integer, it's an A.
 We don't even need an ord function,
 because character constants are really integer constants
 in the ASCII character set, okay?
 Just understand that.
 Every time you see single quote A, single quote,
 think of it as an integer, as a number that happens
 to be conveniently looked up for you by the C compiler.
 And you can take a look at the ASCII character set,
 and you can go look at uppercase A, and you see
 that its decimal equivalent is 65.
 You also see in this table that its hexadecimal is 41,
 and its octal is 101, and its binary, its actual bits
 are one bunch of zeros and a one.
 Now the reason we like octal and hex, as programmers,
 is it's easier to convert directly one without having,
 converting from decimal requires like divisions
 and modulo and stuff like that, but converting from octal
 or hex to binary is direct on a digit by digit basis.
 So I can convert an octal digit to a binary,
 set of binary digits just by looking at each digit
 in succession, so when we're printing out
 and we want to be able to understand
 what the raw bit pattern is of some data,
 we tend to print it out in hex or in octal
 so that we can quickly figure out
 what bits are set inside that value.
 Strings in C are not strings, they're arrays of characters,
 and there is no length, so you can ask Python
 what the length of a string is,
 and the string knows its length.
 But in C, you can ask what the length of a string is,
 but it turns into a for loop that scans
 until it finds the end of the string,
 and the end of the string is a special character,
 which is, quote, backslash zero, quote, which is zero.
 I mean, it's literally the integer zero,
 so you have characters that are non-zero,
 and then you have a zero character,
 and the length is how many characters are in this array
 up to the end.
 Now, that is different than the allocation,
 so you can have, in this case, I have an example
 of a six character array, and I put six things in it.
 It's all full.
 I could have terminated it,
 like you notice I say x sub three equals zero.
 It's no, it's still got six characters in the array,
 but now the end of the string in that array,
 or the end of the character sequence in that array,
 has a zero at position sub three,
 and of course, arrays start at zero,
 so you see the first three characters,
 and the third one is an end,
 and that stops it to print out,
 and so you gotta A, allocate
 for the end of the character string,
 and you B, you've gotta have it there.
 Just because it goes up to six,
 if you don't have the end of the string,
 it's gonna go off and randomly go through memory
 until it blows up, probably, right?
 And so strings must be terminated.
 If you append something to a string,
 first you have to have enough space in that string.
 If you append something to a character array,
 you have to have enough space,
 and then if you overwrite the end of the string,
 you gotta add another little mark to say,
 now the end of the string has been moved.
 So terminating a string is a thing
 that you always gotta think about,
 both when you're scanning through a string,
 and when you're creating a new string.
 Like I said, the C string length is only computable
 by a loop that scans for a zero character.
 So there's a strlen function in string.h
 that computes the string,
 but it's very, very different
 than the len function in Python.
 Len function in Python, x is an object,
 and length is an attribute of that object.
 Whereas in C, there is an array,
 and it has a length, and it has a zero position,
 but to ask how long is it,
 you've gotta actually loop through all the characters
 looking for the zero marker.
 So you kinda can find a length of a character,
 a length of a string,
 the length of a quote unquote string in C,
 but you gotta write a for loop to do it.
 You don't have to write a for loop,
 'cause Python just knows the length.
 Later we'll bring all these things together, much later.
 So one of your assignments, exercise 117,
 is reversing a string in C
 without requiring any information, an extra string.
 You can't, you have a string,
 it's got a certain amount of space,
 and you've gotta just flip.
 You gotta swap the characters.
 You're gonna probably have to draw a picture to do that.
 It is exercise 117, and I'm gonna tell you, do not cheat.
 There are probably a million solutions
 out there on the internet.
 ChetGPT will tell you how to do it.
 Don't be tempted.
 As you do this, you will get there.
 I show you a blurred out version of it.
 It's not all that much code.
 So don't shortcut this.
 Don't just, the solution,
 getting the solution to this assignment
 without actually doing it
 is the meanest thing you'll ever do to yourself.
 You have to do the reversal in place.
 It's a classic interview question.
 At the interview, you don't get to go to ChetGPT.
 You gotta think about even length strings,
 odd length strings, empty strings,
 and single character strings.
 You're gonna have to draw some pictures.
 Take your time.
 Enjoy this assignment.
 Seriously.
 It's not that big.
 And when you get it done,
 you can be very, very proud of yourself
 that you really thought through the low-level storage
 of what an array of characters
 with an ending marker is working with.
 And so that's why it's such a good interview question.
 So there we go.
 That's kinda my call-outs from chapter one.
 Give you an overall sense of the book,
 see character arrays,
 and encouraging you to actually do your homework
 even though there's a million ways to get it done for you.
 Cheers.
 (gentle music)
