LBS290F                  PROGRAMMING ASSIGNMENTS

This describes the policies and procedures for programming assignments 
for LBS290.

GENERAL POLICIES

Programs will be graded as follows:

  20%   Documentation.  Comments are required for your name, program 
        number, and student number.  You must have a general description
        of your program at the beginning of the program.  Each major
        section of code must have descriptive comments.  See the example
        programs in the course packet for examples of adequate documentation.

  20%   Style.  Good variable name, indenting, and the overall readability
        of your program and its output.

  60%   Correctness.  Your program must work and produce the correct output.
        You must choose data so as to test the program completely.

Programs are due at 11:59PM (Just before midnight) on the date indicated
in programming assignment.   Programs are marked off by 10% per day for 
each day late.  

PROGRAMS FOR COMPUTER SCIENCE PORTION OF THE CLASS

There will be a total of 14 programming assignments for the first 6
weeks of the class.  These assignments will be worth 10 points each.
Expect to spend 3 hours on each assignment until you get the hang
of programming.

An extra-credit point awarded for completely correct programs handed in at 
least 2 days early causing these programs to have a possible maximum 
possible point value of 11 points.

The percentage for the computer science programming assignments will be
calculated based on 120 points.   

Given that there will be a possible of 154 points on programming assignments 
(assuming all correct and early) there will be no exceptions on deadlines 
except in the case of a medical situation lasting more than one day.

The computer system which is used for this course is expected to have 
load problems and to crash at times.  This is built into the lenient grading 
of the programming assignments so unless there is an outage of MORE than 
24 hours continuously, the due dates for programs will NOT be adjusted.

The simple solution to this is to get ahead and stay ahead on the 
programming assignments.  This will make sure that you are prepared for a
very busy system or a system crash or an important midterm in another class.

You are to hand in your programs from the computer science portion using 
an electronic grading program.  

The automatic grade program will return your grade to you via E-MAIL.  Make
sure to check the returned message for any errors.

LBS290F                  PROGRAMMING ASSIGNMENTS (continued)


To hand in a program, you must prepare the program and it must be syntax
error free and working correctly.  Your program must have adequate comments. 
The following comments must be in every program:

  Program title
  Program number
  Your name
  Date written
  
To submit your program run the command lbs290-prog and enter the file
name containing your program and program number when you are prompted.

The following is an example:

$ lbs290-prog

Welcome to the program which grades LBS290 programs

Enter file name containing program (i.e. file.f)-assn3.f
Enter the program number-1
Compiling program to check for syntax errors...
Program compiled successfully.
Submitting the program...
Program 1 submitted - expect mail in 1 minute or less...
$

THE APPLICATION PORTION OF THE CLASS

The biology/calculus programming assignments will be handed out by the
instructors during that portion of the course.

Each of these assignments will be graded on a 20 point scale.  Again,
late points are charged at 10% per day.

The programming assignments for the biology/calculus assignments 
are to be handed in on paper with associated graphs, etc.  The 
biology/calculus assignments are NOT to be turned in to
the automatic grading program.
