LBS                      USING THE CE TEXT EDITOR            

You have a choice in this class to use the standard UNIX text editor
called 'vi'.  Vi is rather complicated and hard to learn.  At some 
point you should learn one of the standard UNIX text editors but 
it is not necessary for this class.

A Lyman Briggs freshman in the course in Fall 1991 has written a 
simple text editor called 'ce'. Ce was designed to be very simple to use.

To start ce up, simply type

  ce prog1.f

Where prog1.f is the file you want to edit.

You should be able to use your cursors to move around the text.  Characters
which you type will be put into the file.  You can go back and forth between 
insert mode and overwrite mode by using the CTRL-T key sequence.  
(For control keys you hold down the key marked CTRL or CONTROL and press T)

The following is a partial list of CE functions:

Command            Function
---------          ---------------------------------------------------------
Control-F          Page forward through document
Control-B          Page backward through document
Control-L          Redraw screen (use whenever screen looks odd)
Control-P          Insert a blank line (or return in insert mode)
Control-T          Toggle Insert/Overwrite mode CE Starts in Overwrite mode
Control-W (DEL)    Wipeout the character under the cursor
Control-D FKEY 10  Erase a single line of text
FKEY 1    (ESC 1)  Save and Immediatly exit program
FKEY 2    (ESC 2)  Save and resume editing
FKEY 5    (ESC 5)  Save and exit program (prompt for filename)
FKEY 6    (ESC 6)  Exit program without saving

You can get more functions by pressing ESC h

Hopefully you will find ce easy to use.  As ce is a relatively new
it may have problems please let the instructor or the author know
is you have any problems with the editor.

It is a good idea to save your work often when creating a large file
regardless of the type of editor used.   Also briggs1 sometimes crashes
resulting in lost data.  Repeated saving of your data as you edit it will 
allievate this problem.

The ce documentation written by the author follows.

CE Text Editor v1.1a Beta                    (c)1991 Charles Henrich

1.0 Introduction

    Welcome to CE.  This editor was written with you in mind.  The
    editor was written with one goal in mind, and that was to be very
    very easy to use.  I think I have achieved this goal, and it is
    hoped that you will be able to use this editor like an expert within
    ten minutes of its first use.

2.0 Getting Started

    There are two ways to start the CE editor, the first is to just type
    its name, and the second is to type its name as well as a file name,
    like so:

    ce assignment1.f 

    If the file assignment1.c exists, it will be loaded into the editor, if
    not, the editor will come up as if you had typed no name.
    For a quick reference of all commands in CE, just type ESC then h.

3.0 Commands in CE

    How to save text, and exit CE 
  
        FKEY 1    Save text and exit immediatly
        FKEY 2    Save text and resume editing
        FKEY 5    Prompt for filename, then save text and exit.
        FKEY 6    Exit CE _WITHOUT_ saving text.

    How to move around text

        Arrow Keys    Move Cursor around screen
        Control F     Page forward through document, and beep on last page
        Control B     Page backward through document
        Control G     Goto a specific line number 
        Control Z     Move cursor to beginning of line
        Control X     Move cursor to middle of line
        Control C     Move cursor to end of line

    How to search for text in CE

        Control R     Enter key words to search for

    How to cut & paste text in CE

        FKEY 8        Begin marking text.  Use up and down arrow keys
                      to extend the marked region.
        FKEY 10       Clear marked text.
        FKEY 11       Copy marked text to current location.
        FKEY 12       Move marked text to current location.

    How to delete text

        Control N     Delete marked text.
        Control D     Delete current line.
        Control W     Wipeout character under cursor
          (DEL)       Wipeout character under cursor
        Control E     Erase many characters under, and to the right of the
                      cursor.

    How to insert text

        Control P     Insert blank line at current location
        Control K     Insert many lines at current location
        Control T     Toggle between INSERT/OVERWRITE mode

    How to undelete text

        Control A     Insert the last line deleted at current location

    Misc. Commands

        ESC h         A list of all commands in CE
        Control Y     Read another file into current document, at current
                      location
        Control V     Display vital statistics on file.      
                       (Number of lines, current line #, filename etc..)
        Control L     Immediatly redisplay screen
        Control U     Join the current line, and the next into one line
        FKEY 4        Save current text, and run it through the C compiler

4.0 Comments, Suggestions, Bug-Fixes

    All comments and suggestions are welcome, to get them to me, just mail
    them off to

    henrich@crs.cl.msu.edu

    and I will get back to you as soon as possible.  If you find any bugs with
    the editor, by all means mail me *RIGHT-O-WAY* so I can fix them.  I have
    been testing for quite a while now, but some bugs may still be lurking....
    If you have any problems with the editor, first ask Charles Severance for
    help then if that fails, send me email, and Ill see what I can do.

    I hope you find this easy to use, as that was my original intention.

    Charles Henrich
    Michigan State University

    henrich@crs.cl.msu.edu

